{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg1252\hyphauto1\deff0\deftab720\paperw10620\paperh13140\margl1080\margr780\margt720\margb1580{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77 DivulgeRg-Regular;}{\f1\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77
STIXMathJax_Main-Regular;}{\f2\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77 STIXMathJax_Main-Italic;}{\f3\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset2 STIXMathJax_Latin-Regular;}
{\f4\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset2 STIX-Regular;}{\f5\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77 Times-Roman;}{\f6\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77
STIXMathJax_Main-Bold;}{\f7\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77 UniMath;}{\f8\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77 DivulgeRg-Bold;}{\f9\fnil\ftnil\cpg10000\fcharset77
Helvetica;}}{\colortbl\red0\blue0\green0;\red255\blue255\green255;}{\stylesheet{\s0\f5\fs24\ltrpar\ql\fi0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0\deftab720\facenter\sl288\slmult1\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033\snext0
\u91 ?\u78 ?\u111 ?\u32 ?\u80 ?\u97 ?\u114 ?\u97 ?\u103 ?\u114 ?\u97 ?\u112 ?\u104 ?\u32 ?\u83 ?\u116 ?\u121 ?\u108 ?\u101 ?\u93 ?;}
{\s1\f0\fs34\ltrpar\ql\fi0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl440\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar0\lang1033\sbasedon0\snext1
\u101 ?\u103 ?\u108 ?\u95 ?\u116 ?\u116 ?;}{\s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033\sbasedon0\snext2
\u101 ?\u114 ?\u102 ?\u95 ?\u116 ?\u120 ?;}{\*\cs3 \additive \b0\i \u105 ?\u116 ?\u97 ?\u108 ?\u105 ?\u99 ?;}{\*\cs4 \additive \f3\b0\i0
\u115 ?\u116 ?\u105 ?\u120 ?\u95 ?\u108 ?\u97 ?\u116 ?\u105 ?\u110 ?;}{\*\cs5 \additive \b0\i \u105 ?\u116 ?\u97 ?\u108 ?;}{\*\cs6 \additive \f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul0\cf0\outl0
\u102 ?\u116 ?\u111 ?\u95 ?\u116 ?\u120 ?\u46 ?\u112 ?\u116 ?;}}\fet2\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstpg\ftnrestart\aenddoc\aftnstart1{\info
{\revtim\yr2020\mo2\dy21\hr16\min49}}\pard\plain \s1\f0\fs34\ltrpar\ql\fi0\li0\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl440\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar0\lang1033
{\fs34 References\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Abdolvahab, M., & Carello, C. (2015). Functional distance in human gait transitions. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 161}
{\fs16 , 170\'d0176.\par Abernethy, B. (1993). Searching for the minimal essential }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1\u173 ?information for skilled perception and action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Research, 55,}{\fs16  131\'d0138.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Abernethy, B. (1999). The Coleman Roberts Griffith Address: Movement expertise: A juncture between psychology theory and practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  126\'d0141.\par }{\fs16 Abernethy, B., }{\fs16
& Burgess-Limerick, R. (1992). Visual information for the timing of skilled movements: A review. In \line J. J. Summers (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Approaches to the study of motor \line control and learning}{\fs16  (pp. 343\'d0384). Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par Abernethy, B., }
{\fs16 & Russell, D. G. (1987). Expert-novice \line differences in an applied selective attention task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Sport Psychology, 9,}{\fs16  326\'d0345.}{\fs16 \par Abernethy, B., & Sparrow, W. A. (1992). The rise and fall of dominant paradigms in motor behavior research. In \line J. J. Summers (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Approaches to the study of motor control and learning}{\fs16  (pp. 3\'d045). Amsterdam: Elsevier.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Abernethy, B., & Wood, J. M. (2001). Do generalized visual training programmes for sport really work? An experimental investigation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Sports Sciences, 19,}{\fs16  203\'d0222.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Abernethy, B., Wood, J. M., & Parks, S. (1999). Can the anticipatory skills of experts be learned by novices? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}{\fs16  313\'d0318.}{\fs16 \par Abernethy, B., & Zawi, K. (2007). Pickup of essential kinematics underpins expert perception of movement patterns. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 39}{\fs16 , 353\'d0367.\par Abernethy, B., Zawi, K., & Jackson, R. (2008). Expertise and attunement to kinematic constraints. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, 37}{\fs16 (6), 931\'d0948.\par }{\fs16 Acocella, J. (2003, January 6). Second act: Suzanne Farrell }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16\u173 ?returns with a company of her own. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 The New Yorker,}{\fs16  48\'d061.\par }
{\fs16 Ada, L., O\rquote Dwyer, N. J., & Neilson, P. D. (1993). Improvement in kinematic characteristics and coordination following stroke quantified by linear systems analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 12,}{\fs16  137\'d0153.}{\fs16 \par Adams, J. A. (1986). Use of the model\rquote s knowledge of results to increase the observer\rquote s performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 12,}{\fs16  89}{\fs16 \'d098.\par Adams, J. A. (1987). Historical review and appraisal of \u173 ?
research on the learning, retention, and transfer of human motor skills. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Bulletin, 101,}
{\fs16  41}{\fs16 \'d074.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-5 Adams, J. A., & Dijkstra, S. J. (1966). Short-term memory for motor }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
responses. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  314}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\'d0318.\par }{\fs16 Adolph, K. E. (1997). Learning in the development of infant locomotion. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 62,}{\fs16  1\'d0162.\par Adolph, K. E. (2000). Specificity of learning: Why infants fall over a vertical cliff. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 11,}{\fs16  290\'d0295.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Adolph, K. E. (2005). Learning to learn in the development of action. In J. J. Rieser, J. J. Lockman, & C. A. Nelson (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Action as an organizer of learning and development \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 (pp. 91\'d0122). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Aggarwal, R., Grantcharov, T. P., Eriksen, J. R., Blirup, D., \line Kristiansen, V. B., Funch-Jensen, P., & Darzi, A. (2006). An evidence-based virtual reality training program for novice laparoscopic surgeons. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Annals of Surgery,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 244}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
, 310\'d0314.\par }{\fs16 Albert, F., Ribot-Ciscar, E., Fiocchi, M., Bergenheim, M., & Roll, J. P. (2005). Proprioceptive feedback in humans \u173 ?
expresses motor invariants during writing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 164,}{\fs16  242\'d0249.\par Alcott, A. (1991, December). Winning at golf. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Golf Magazine, 19,}{\fs16  93.\par Allami, N., Paulignan, Y., Brovelli, A., & Boussaoud, D. (2008). Visuomotor learning with combination of different rates of motor imagery and physical practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 184}{\fs16 , 105\'d0113.}{\fs16 \par Allport, D. A. (1980). Attention and performance. In \line G. \u173 ?
Claxton (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognitive psychology: New directions}{\fs16  (pp.\u8239 ?112\'d0153). London: Routledge }
{\fs16 & Kegan Paul.\par Almasbakk, B., Whiting, H. T. A., & Helgerud, J. (2001). The \u173 ?efficient learner. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Biological Cybernetics, 84,}{\fs16  75\'d083.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Amazeen, P. G. (2002). Is dynamics the content of a generalized}
{\fs16  motor program for rhythmic interlimb coordination? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 34,}{\fs16
 233\'d0251.}{\fs16 \par Amazeen, E. L., Amazeen, P. G., Post, A. A., & Beek, P. J. (1999). Timing the selection of information during rhythmic catching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 31,}{\fs16  279}{\fs16 \'d0289.\par Anderson, D. I. (2000). Complex motor skill acquisition and the one-trial-learning phenomenon. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies}{\fs16 , 38, 23\'d056.\par Anderson, D. I., Campos, J. J., & Barbu-Roth, M. A. (2004). \line A developmental perspective on visual proprioception. In G. Bremner and A. Slater (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Theories of infant development}{\fs16  (pp. 30\'d069). London: Blackwell.\par Anderson, D. I., Campos, J. J., Rivera, M., Dahl, A., \line Uchiyama, I., & Barbu-Roth, M. (2013). The consequences of independent locomotion for brain and psychological development. In R. C. Shepherd (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebral palsy in infancy and early childhood.}{\fs16  Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par Anderson, D. I., Magill, R. A., & Sekiya, H. (1994). A reconsideration of the trials-delay of knowledge of results \u173 ?
paradigm in motor skill learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  286}
{\fs16 \'d0290.\par Anderson, D. I., Magill, R. A., Sekiya, H., & Ryan, G. (2005). Support for an explanation of the guidance effect in motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  231\'d0238.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Anderson, D. I., & Mayo, A. M. (2015). A skill acquisition perspective on early specialization in sport. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Kinesiology Review, 4,}{\fs16  230\'d0247.\par Anderson, D. I., Rymal, A. M., & Ste-Marie, D. M. (2014). Modeling and feedback. In A. Papaioannou & D. Hackfort (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Routledge Handbook of Sport and Exercise Psychology }{\fs16 (pp. 272}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 288). New York: Routledge.\par }
{\fs16 Anderson, D. I., & Sidaway, B. (1994). Coordination changes }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 associated with practice of a soccer kick. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Research Quarterly}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  93\'d099.\par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Anderson, J. R. (1987). Skill acquisition: Compilation of weak-method problem solutions. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4
Psychological Review, 94,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  192}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \'d0210.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
Ankarali, M. M., Sen, H. T., De, A., Okamura, A. M., & Cowan, N. J. (2014). Haptic feedback enhances rhythmic motor control by reducing variability, not improving convergence rate. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 111}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 , 1286\'d01299.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4
\par }{\fs16 Annesi, J. J. (1998). Effects of computer feedback on adherence to exercise. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 87,}
{\fs16  723}{\fs16 \'d0730.\par Annett, J. (1959). Learning a pressure under conditions of \u173 ?immediate and delayed knowledge of results. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  3\'d015.}{\fs16 \par Annett, J. (1969). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Feedback and human behavior.}{\fs16  Baltimore, MD: Penguin.}{\fs16 \par Annett, J. (1970). The role of action feedback in the acquisition of simple motor responses. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, \line 11,}{\fs16  217\'d0221.}{\fs16 \par Annett, J., & Piech, J. (1985). The retention of a skill following }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 distributed training. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Programmed Learning and Educational Technology, 22,}
{\fs16  182\'d0186.}{\fs16 \par Anson, J. G. (1982). Memory drum theory: Alternative tests and explanations for the complexity effects on simple \line reaction time. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 14,}{\fs16  228\'d0246.\par Arend, S., & Higgins, J. R. (1976). A strategy for the classification, subjective analysis, and observation of human movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 2, \line }{\fs16 36\'d052.\par Arora, S., Aggarwal, R., Sirimanna, P., Moran, A., \u173 ?
Grantcharov, T., Kneebone, R., .\'ca.\'ca. Darzi, A. (2011). \line Mental practice enhances surgical technical skills: \line A randomized controlled study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annals of Surgery, 253,}{\fs16  265\'d0270.\par }{\fs16 Ash, D. W., & Holding, D. H. (1990). Backward versus \line forward chaining in the acquisition of a keyboard skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Factors, 32,}{\fs16  139\'d0146.\par Ashford, D., Bennett, S. J., & Davids, K. (2006). Observational modeling effects for movement dynamics and movement outcome measures across differing task constraints: A meta-analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 38}{\fs16 (3), 185\'d0205.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: \line A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory}{\fs16  (Vol. 2, pp.\u8239 ?
89}{\fs16 \'d0197). New York, NY: Academic Press.\par }{\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'e7}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 vila, L. T. G., Chiviacowsky, S., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012). Positive social-}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 comparative}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  feedback enhances motor learning in children. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 13, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 849}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 853.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory:}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3  }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Looking back and looking forward. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 4}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 , 829\'d0839.\par }
{\fs16 Baddeley, A. D. (1986). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Working memory}{\fs16 . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.}
{\fs16 \par Baddeley, A. D. (1995). Working memory. In M. S. Gazzaniga \line (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The cognitive neurosciences}
{\fs16  (pp. 755\'d0764). \u173 ?Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.}{\fs16 \par Baddeley, A. D., & Longman, D. J. A. (1978). The influence of length and frequency of training session on the rate of learning to type. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ergonomics, 21,}{\fs16  627\'d0635.\par Baddeley, A. D. (2012). Working memory: Theories, models, and controversies. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i Annual Review of Psychology,}{\fs16  63, \line 1\'d029.\par Badets, A., & Blandin, Y. (2012). Feedback and intention during motor-skill learning: A connection with prospective memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Research, 76}{\fs16 , 601\'d0610.\par Badets, A., Blandin, Y., Bouquet, C. A., & Shea, C. H. (2006). The intention superiority effect in motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, }{\fs16 491\'d0505.}
{\fs16 \par Bahill, A. T., & LaRitz, T. (1984). Why can\rquote t batters keep their eyes on the ball? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
American Scientist, 72,}{\fs16  249}{\fs16 \'d0252.\par Baker, J., & Young, B. (2014). 20 years later: Deliberate practice and the development of expertise in sport. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 7}{\fs16 , 135\'d0157.\par Baker, K., Rochester, L., & Nieuwboer, A. (2007). The immediate effect of attentional, auditory, and a combined cue strategy on gait during single and dual tasks in Parkinson\rquote s disease. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 88,}
{\fs16  1593\'d01600.\par Bakker, F. C., Boschker, M. S. J., & Chung, T. (1996). Changes in muscular activity while imagining weight lifting using stimulus or response propositions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 18,}{\fs16  313\'d0324.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Bandura, A. (1986). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }{\fs16 Banz, R., Bollinger, M., Colombo, G., Dietz, V., & \line L}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9f}{\fs16
nenburger, L. (2008). Computerized visual feedback: \line An adjunct to robotic-assisted gait training. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Physical \line Therapy, 88, }{\fs16 1135\'d01145.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Barbieri, G., Gissot, A. S., Fouque, F., Casillas, J. M., Pozzo, T., \line }
{\fs16 & P}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8e}{\fs16 rennou, D. (2008). Does proprioception contribute to the sense of verticality? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 185,}{\fs16  545\'d0552.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Bard, C., Fleury, M., & Goulet, C. (1994). Relationship between perceptual strategies and response adequacy in sport situation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 25,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  266}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\'d0281.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Bard, C., Paillard, J., Lajoie, Y., Fleury, M., Teasdale, N., \u173 ?Forget, R., & Lamarre, Y. (1992). Role of afferent information in the timing of motor commands: A comparative study with a deafferented patient. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neuropsychologia, 30,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  201}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \'d0206.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Bardy, B. G., Ouiller, O., Lagarde, J., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2007). On perturbation and pattern coexistence in postural coordination dynamics. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Motor Behavior, 39,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  326\'d0334.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Barela, A. M. F., Barela, J. A., Rinaldi, N. M., & de Toledo, \line D. R. (2009). Influence of imposed optic flow characteristics and intention on postural responses. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, \line 13}{\fs16 (2),}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  119\'d0129.\par Barreiros, J., Figueiredo, T., & Godinho, M. (2007). The contextual interference effect in applied settings. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Physical Education Review, 13, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 195\'d0208.\par }{\fs16 Barrow, H. M. (1957). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor ability testing for college men.}{\fs16  Minneapolis, MN: Burgess.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Barton, J. W. (1921). Smaller versus larger units in learning the maze. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4,}
{\fs16  414}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 424.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Basili, P., Saglam, M., Kruse, T., & Huber, M. (2013). Strategies of locomotor collision avoidance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gait & Posture, 37, }{\fs16 385}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 390.}{\fs16 \par Battig, W. F. (1979). The flexibility of human memory. In \line L. S. Cermak & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Levels of processing in \u173 ?human memory}{\fs16  (pp. 23\'d044). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.}{\fs16
\par Bear, M. F., Connors, B. W., & Paradiso, M. A. (2001). \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience: Exploring the brain}
{\fs16  (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.}{\fs16 \par Beatty, J. (2001). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
The human brain: Essentials of behavioral neuroscience.}{\fs16  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Beauchamp, M. S., Lee, K. E., Haxby, J. V., & Martin, A. (2003). }
{\fs16 fMRI responses to video and point-light displays of moving humans and manipulable objects. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of \u173 ?Cognitive Neuroscience, 15,}{\fs16  991\'d01001.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Beets, I. A. M., Mace, M., Meesen, R. L. J., Cuypers, K., Levin, O., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 &}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Swinnen, S. P. (2012). Active versus passive training of a complex bimanual task: Is prescriptive proprioceptive information sufficient for inducing motor learning? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS ONE, 7,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  e37687. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037687.\par }{\fs16 Beilock, S. (2010). Choke: }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 What the secrets of the brain reveal about getting it right when you have to}{\fs16 . New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.\par }
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Beilock, S. L., Bertenthal, B. I., McCoy, A. M., & Carr, T. (2004). Haste does not always make waste: Expertise, direction of attention, and speed versus accuracy in performing sensorimotor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  373\'d0379.\par }{\fs16 Beilock, S. L., Carr, T., MacMahon, C., & Starkes, J. (2002). When paying attention becomes counterproductive: Impact of divided versus skill-focused attention on novice and experienced performance of sensorimotor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8,}{\fs16  6\'d016.\par Beilock, S. L., & Carr, T. H. (2001). On the fragility of \line skilled performance: What governs choking under \line pressure? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130,}{\fs16  701\'d0725.\par }{\fs16 Bekkering, H., & Neggers, S. F. W. (2002). Visual search is modulated by action intentions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 13,}{\fs16  370\'d0374.}{\fs16 \par Benjaminse, A., Gokeler, A., Dowling, A. V., Faigenbaum, A., Ford, K. R., Hewett, T. E., }
{\fs16 \'c9}{\fs16  }{\fs16 Myer, G. D. (2015). Optimization of the anterior cruciate ligament injury prevention paradigm: Novel feedback techniques to enhance motor learning and reduce injury risk. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy, 45}{\fs16 (3), 170\'d0182.\par Benedetti, C., & McCullagh, P. (1987). Post-knowledge of \u173 ?
results delay: Effects of interpolated activity on learning and performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 58,}
{\fs16  375\'d0381.\par Bengtsson, S. L., & Ull}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8e}{\fs16 n, F. (2006). Dissociation between melodic and rhythmic processing during piano performance from musical scores. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 30,}{\fs16  272\'d0284.}{\fs16 \par Bennett, S., Davids, K., & Craig, T. (1999). The effect of \line temporal and informational constraints on one-handed catching performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}{\fs16  206}{\fs16 \'d0211.\par }{\fs16 Berg, E., & Cherry, S. R. (2018). Innovations in instrumentation for positron emission tomography. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Seminars in Nuclear Medicine, 48}{\fs16 (4), 311}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 331.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Berg, W. P., Wade, M. G., & Greer, N. L. (1994). Visual regulation of gait in bipedal locomotion: Revisiting Lee, Lishman, & Thomson (1982). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20,}{\fs16  854\'d0863.\par }
{\fs16 Berger, H. J., van Es, N. J., van Spaendonck, K. P., Teunisse, J.\u8239 ?P., Horstink, M. W., van\rquote t Hof, M. A., }{\fs16
& Cools, A. R. (1999). Relationship between memory strategies and motor symptoms in Parkinson\rquote s disease. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Clinical Experimental Neuropsychology, 21,}{\fs16  677\'d0684.}{\fs16 \par Berlucchi, G., & Buchtel, H. A. (2009). Neuronal plasticity: Historical roots and evolution of meaning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 192,}{\fs16  307\'d0319.\par }{\fs16 Bernardi, G., Ricciardi, E., Sani, L., Gaglianese, A., Papasogli, }
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 A., Ceccarelli, R., }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  Pietrini, P. (2013). How skill }
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \line }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 expertise shapes the brain functional architecture: }{\fs16 an }{\fs16 \line }
{\fs16 fMRI study of visuo-spatial and motor processing in }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 professional racing-car and naive drivers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
PLoS One, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 8}{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1
(10)}{\fs16 , }{\fs16 e77764.}{\fs16 \par Bernstein, N. (1967). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The co-ordination and regulation of movement.}
{\fs16  Oxford, England: Pergamon Press.\par Bernstein, N. A. (1996). On dexterity and its development. In M. L. Latash & M. T. Turvey (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Dexterity and its development }{\fs16 (pp. 3\'d0244). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.\par }{\fs16 Bertram, C. P., Marteniuk, R. G., & Guadagnoli, M. A. (2007). On the use and misuse of video feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review \line of Golf Coaching 2007, }{\fs16 37\'d046.\par }{\fs16 Bie}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u324 ?}
{\fs16 kiewicz, M. M. N., Bringoux, L., Buloup, F., Rodger, M., Craig, C., & Bourdin, C. (2019). The limitations of being a copycat: Learning golf putting through auditory and visual guidance. }
{\*\cs5\fs16\b0\i Frontiers in Psychology, 10}{\fs16 (}{\fs16 92}{\fs16 )}{\fs16 . doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00092.\par }{\fs16 Bilodeau, I. M. (1969). Information feedback. In \line E. A. Bilodeau (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Principles of skill acquisition}{\fs16  \line (pp. 225\'d0285). New York, NY: Academic Press.\par Bingham, G. P. (2005). Calibration of distance and size does not calibrate shape information: Comparison of dynamic monocular and static and dynamic binocular vision. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ecological Psychology, 17}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  55\'d074.\par }{\fs16 Binsch, O., Oudejans, R. R. D., Bakker, F. C., & Savelsbergh, G. J. P. (2010). Ironic effects and final target fixation in a penalty shooting task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Movement Science, 29, }{\fs16 277\'d0288.\par }{\fs16 Bizzi, E., & Polit, A. (1979). Processes controlling visually evoked movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychologia, 17,}{\fs16  203\'d0213.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Blais, C. (1991). Instructions as constraints on psychomotor performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 21,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  217\'d0231.\par }{\fs16 Blake, R., & Shiffar, M. (2007). Perception of human motion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review of Psychology, 58,}{\fs16  47\'d073.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Blandin, Y., & Proteau, L. (2000). On the cognitive basis of \u173 ?observational learning: Development of mechanisms for the detection and correction of errors. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology, 53A,}{\fs16  846\'d0867.\par }{\fs16 Blouin, J., Bard, C., Teasdale, N., Paillard, J., Fleury, M., \line Forget, R., & Lamarre, Y. (1993). Reference systems for \line \u173 ?
coding spatial information in normal subjects and a deafferented patient. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 93,}
{\fs16  324\'d0331.\par }{\fs16 Blum, L., & Korner-Bitensky, N. (2008). Usefulness of the Berg Balance Scale in stroke rehabilitation: A systematic review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 88,}{\fs16  559\'d0566.\par }{\fs16 Bohil, C. J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2011). Virtual }
{\fs16\u173 ?}{\fs16 reality in neuroscience research and therapy}{\fs16 .}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Nature Reviews: }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neuroscience, 12,}{\fs16  752\'d0762.\par }{\fs16 Boisgontier, M. P., Serbruyns, L., & Swinnen, S. P. (2017). Physical activity predicts performance in an unpracticed bimanual coordination task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology, 8}{\fs16  (249). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00249.}{\fs16 \par Bonnetblanc, F., Martin, O., }
{\fs16 & Teasdale, N. (2004). Pointing to a target from an upright standing position: Anticipatory postural adjustments are modulated by the size of the targets in humans. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience Letters, 358,}{\fs16  181\'d0184.\par Bootsma, R. J., Fernandez, L., Morice, A. H. P., & Montagne, G. (2010). Top-level players\rquote  visual control of interceptive actions: Bootsma and van Wieringen (1990) 20 years later. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 36}{\fs16 (4), 1056\'d01063.\par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Bootsma, R. J., Marteniuk, R. G., MacKenzie, C. L., }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 & Zaal, F.\u8239 ?T. \line }
{\fs16 (1994). The speed-accuracy trade-off in manual prehension: Effects of movement amplitude, object size and object width on kinematic characteristics. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain \u173 ?Research, 98,}{\fs16  535\'d0541.}{\fs16 \par Bootsma, R. J., & Peper, C. E. (1992). Predictive visual information sources for the regulation of action with special \u173 ?
emphasis on catching and hitting. In L. Proteau & \line D. Elliott (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Vision and motor control}
{\fs16  (pp. 285\'d0313). Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par }{\fs16 Bootsma, R. J., & van Wieringen, P. C. W. (1990). Timing an attacking forehand drive in table tennis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \line Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and \line Performance, 16,}{\fs16  21\'d029.}
{\fs16 \par Borel, L., Redon-Zouiteni, C., Cauvin, P., Dumitrescu, M., Dev}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8f}{\fs16 ze, A., & P}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'8e}{\fs16 ruch, P. (2014). Unilateral vestibular loss impairs external space representation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
PLoS ONE, 9}{\fs16 (2), e88576. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0088576.\par Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands \ldblquote feel\rdblquote  touch that eyes see. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Nature, 391}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  756.\par }{\fs16 Boulter, L. R. (1964). Evaluations of mechanisms in delay of knowledge of results. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Canadian Journal of Psychology, 18,}{\fs16  281}{\fs16 \'d0291.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Boutin, A., Pinsard, B., Bor}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \'8e}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 , A., Carrier, J., Fogel, S. M., & Doyon, J. (2018). Transient synchronization of hippocampo-striato-thalamo-cortical networks during sleep spindle oscillations induces motor memory consolidation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 169,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  419}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4
430.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Bouzid, N., & Crawshaw, C. M. (1987). Massed versus distributed wordprocessor training. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Applied Ergonomics, 18,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  220}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \'d0222.\par }
{\fs16 Boyce, B. A. (1991). The effects of an instructional strategy with two schedules of augmented KP feedback upon skill acquisition of a selected shooting task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 11,}{\fs16  47}{\fs16 \'d058.\par }{\fs16 Boyd, L. A., & Winstein, C. J. (2004). Providing explicit information disrupts implicit motor learning after basal ganglia stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Learning and Memory, 11}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  388\'d0396.\par Boyles, J., Panzer, S., & Shea, C. H. (2012). Increasing complex bimanual multi-frequency coordination patterns are equally easy to perform with on-line relative velocity feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 216}{\fs16 (4), 515\'d0525.\par Brace, D. K. (1927). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Measuring motor ability.}{\fs16  New York, NY: \line A. S. Barnes.}{\fs16 \par Brady, F. (1998). A theoretical and empirical review of the contextual interference effect and the learning of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quest, 50,}{\fs16  266\'d0293.\par Bramson, R. (2011). Comparing the effects of mental imagery rehearsal and physical practice on learning lumbar puncture by medical students. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annals of Behavioral Science and Medical Education, 17,}{\fs16  3\'d06.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Brashers-Krug, T., Shadmehr, R., & Bizzi, E. (1996). \u173 ?Consolidation in human motor memory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2
Nature, 382,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  252\'d0255.\par }{\fs16 Brenner, E., & Smeets, J. B. (2009).Modifying one\rquote s hand trajectory when a moving target\rquote s orientation changes. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 196}{\fs16 (3), 375\'d0383. \par Brenner, E., & Smeets, J. B. J. (1997). Fast responses of the human hand to changes in target position. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 29,}{\fs16  297}{\fs16 \'d0310.\par }{\fs16 Brenton, J., M}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'9f}{\fs16 ller, S., Rhodes, R., & Finch, B. (2018). Automated vision occlusion-timing instrument for perception-action research. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Behavior Research Methods, 50}{\fs16 (1)}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 ,}{\fs16  228}{\fs16
\'d0}{\fs16 235.}{\fs16 \par Breslin, C.W., & Safer, M.A. (2011). Effects of event valence on long-term memory for two baseball championship games. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 22}{\fs16 (2), 1408\'d01412. \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Breslin, G., Schmidt, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (2012). Especial skills: Generality and specificity in motor learning. In \line N. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  (2nd ed., pp. 337\'d0349). New York, NY: Routledge.\par }
{\fs16 Brisson, B., & Jolicoeur, P. (2007). Electrophysiological }{\fs16 evidence}{\fs16  of central interference in the control of visuospatial attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14,}{\fs16  126\'d0132.\par }{\fs16 Broadbent, D. E. (1958). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perception and communication.}{\fs16  \u173 ?Oxford: Pergamon Press.\par }{\fs16 Broadbent, D. P., Causer, J., Ford, P. R., & Williams, }
{\fs16 A. M.}{\fs16  (2015). Contextual interference effect on perceptual-}{\fs16 cognitive}{\fs16  skills training. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 47,}{\fs16  1243\'d01250.\par Broadbent, D. P., Causer, J., Williams, A. M., & Ford, P. R. (2017). The role of error processing in the contextual interference effect during the training of perceptual-cognitive skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 43}{\fs16 (7), 1329-1342.}
{\fs16 \par Brothen, T. (2012). What ever happened to John Dodson? \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 History of Psychology, 15}
{\fs16 (1), 100\'d0105.\par }{\fs16 Brown, L. E., Halpert, B. A., & Goodale, M. A. (2005). \line Peripheral vision for perception and action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 165, }{\fs16 97\'d0106.}{\fs16 \par Brown, R. W. (1928). A comparison of the whole, part, and combination methods for learning piano music. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  235\'d0247.}{\fs16 \par Brown, T. G. (1911). The intrinsic factors in the act of \line progression in the mammal. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Proceedings of the Royal \line Society of London (Biology), 84,}{\fs16  308\'d0319.}{\fs16 \par Brucker, B. S., & Bulaeva, N. V. (1996). Biofeedback effect on electromyographic responses in patients with spinal cord injury. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 77,}{\fs16  133\'d0137.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16
Brueckner, D., Kiss, R., & Muehlbauer, T. (2018). Associations between practice-related changes in motor performance and muscle activity in healthy individuals: A systematic review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Sports Medicine\'d0Open, 4}{\fs16 (9). }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798-018-0123-6.}
{\fs16  \par Bryan, W. L., & Harter, N. (1897). Studies in the physiology and psychology of the telegraphic language. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Review, 4,}{\fs16  27\'d053.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Buccino, G., Binkoski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gallese, V., .\'ca.\'ca. Freund, }
{\fs16 H. J. (2001). Action \u173 ?observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic \u173 ?manner: An fMRI study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Journal of Neuro\u173 ?science, 13,}{\fs16  400\'d0404.\par Buchanan, J. J., & Wang, C. (2012). Overcoming the \line guidance effect in motor skill learning: Feedback all \line the time can be beneficial.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Experimental Brain Research, 219,}{\fs16  305\'d0320.\par }{\fs16 Buekers, M. J. A., & Magill, R. A. (1995). The role of task experience and prior knowledge for detecting invalid augmented feedback while learning a motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44A,}{\fs16  105}{\fs16 \'d0117.\par Buekers, M. J. A., Magill, R. A., & Hall, K. G. (1992). The effect of erroneous knowledge of results on skill acquisition when augmented information is redundant. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly \line Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44A,}{\fs16  105}{\fs16 \'d0117.\par Buekers, M. J. A., Magill, R. A., & Sneyers, K. M. (1994). \u173 ?
Resolving a conflict between sensory feedback and \line knowledge of results while learning a motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of \u173 ?Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  27}{\fs16 \'d035.\par Buekers, M. J., Montagne, G., de Rugy, A., & Laurent, M. (1999). The regulation of externally paced human \line locomotion in virtual reality. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neuroscience Letters, 275,}{\fs16  171\'d0174.\par }{\fs16 Buekers, M. J., Montagne, G., & Laurent, M. (1999). Is the player in control, or is the control somewhere out of the player? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 30,}{\fs16  490\'d0506.\par }{\fs16 Bullock, D. (2004). From parallel sequence representation to calligraphic control: A conspiracy of neural networks. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 8,}{\fs16  371\'d0391.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Bullock, D., & Grossberg, S. (1991). Adaptive neural networks for control of movement trajectories invariant under speed and force rescaling. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Human Movement \line Science, 10,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  3\'d053.\par }{\fs16 Butler, D., Andersson, G. B. J., Trafimow, J., Schipplein, }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 O. D., & Andriacchi, T. P. (1993). The influence of load knowledge on lifting technique. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Ergonomics, 36,}{\fs16  1489\'d01493.\par }{\fs16 Butler, M. S., Reeve, T. G., & Fischman, M. G. (1996). Effects of the instructional set in the bandwidth feedback paradigm on motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67,}{\fs16  355\'d0359.\par Caljouw, S. R., van der Kamp, J., }
{\fs16 & Savelsbergh, G. J. P. (2004). Catching optical information for the regulation of timing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 155,}{\fs16  427\'d0438.\par Calmels, C., Hars, M., Holmes, P., Jarry, G., & Stam, }{\fs16 C. J.}{\fs16
 (2008). Non-linear EEG synchronization during observation and execution of simple and complex sequential \line finger movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 190,}{\fs16  389\'d0400.\par }{\fs16 Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D. E., Grezes, J., Passingham, R. E., & Haggard, P. (2005). Action observation and acquired motor skills: an FMRI study with expert dancers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebral Cortex, 15,}{\fs16  1243\'d01249.}{\fs16 \par Camachon, C., Buekers, M., }{\fs16 & Montagne, G. (2004). Is the }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 learning of goal-directed displacement effector independent?}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Movement Science, 23,}{\fs16  239\'d0255.\par Cameron, B. D., Franks, I. M., Enns, J. T., & Chua, R. (2007). Dual-target interference for the \ldblquote automatic pilot\rdblquote  in the dorsal stream. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 181, \line }{\fs16 297\'d0305.}{\fs16 \par Campbell, K. C., & Proctor, R. W. (1993). Repetition effects with categorizable stimulus and response sets. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and \u173 ?Cognition, 19,}{\fs16  1345\'d01362.\par }
{\fs16 Campbell, M. J., & Moran, A. P. (2014). There is more to green reading than meets the eye! Exploring the gaze behaviors of expert golfers on a virtual golf putting task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognitive Processing}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  15,}
{\fs16  363}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 372.\par }{\fs16 Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Barbu-Roth, M., Hubbard, E. M., Hertenstein, M. J., & Witherington, D. (2000). Travel broadens the mind. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Infancy, 1,}{\fs16  149\'d0219.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Ca}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'96}{\fs16 al-Bruland, R., & Mann, D. L. (2015). Time to broaden the scope of research on anticipatory behavior: a case for the role of probabilistic information. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology, 6, }{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 1518}{\fs16 . doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01518.\par }
{\fs16 Carlton, L. G. (1992). Visual processing time and the control of\u8239 ?movement. In L. Proteau & D. Elliott (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Vision and motor control}{\fs16  (pp. 3\'d031). Amsterdam: Elsevier.}{\fs16 \par Carlton, L. G., Carlton, M. J., & Newell, K. M. (1987). Reaction time and response dynamics. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology, 39A,}{\fs16  337\'d0360.\par Caronni, A., & Cavallari, P. (2009). Anticipatory postural adjustments stabilise the whole upper-limb prior to a \line gentle index finger tap. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 194,}{\fs16  59\'d066.}{\fs16 \par Carroll, W. R., & Bandura, A. (1990). Representational guidance of action production in observational learning: A\u8239 ?
causal analysis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 22,}{\fs16  85}{\fs16 \'d097.\par Carron, A. V. (1969). Performance and learning in a discrete motor task under massed vs. distributed practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 40,}{\fs16  481}{\fs16 \'d0489.\par Carson, R. G., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2004). Governing coordination: Behavioural principles and neural correlates. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 154,}{\fs16  267}{\fs16 \'d0274.\par Carter, M. J., Smith, V., & Ste-Marie, D. M. (2016). Judgments of learning are significantly higher following feedback on relatively good versus relatively poor trials despite no actual learning differences. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Movement Science, 45}{\fs16 , 63\'d070.\par Catmur, C., Walsh, V., & Heyes, C. (2009). Associative sequence learning: The role of experience in the development of imitation and the mirror system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, }{\fs16 2369\'d02380.\par Casarotti, M., Lisi, M., Umilt}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'88}{\fs16 ,C., & Zorzi, M. (2012). Paying attention through eye movements: A computational investigation of the premotor theory of spatial attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24}{\fs16 (7),}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  }{\fs16
1519\'d01531.\par Cattaneo, D., Jonsdottir, J., & Repetti, S. (2007). Reliability of four scales on balance disorders in persons with multiple sclerosis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Disability & Rehabilitation, 29, }{\fs16 1920\'d01925.\par Cauraugh, J. H., Chen, D., & Radlo, S. J. (1993). Effects of \u173 ?
traditional and reversed bandwidth knowledge of results on motor learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 64,}
{\fs16  413\'d0417.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Causer, J., Holmes, P. S., & Williams, A. M. (2011). Quiet eye training in a visuomotor control task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 43}{\fs16 (6), 1042\'d01049.\par Cavaco, S., Anderson, S. W., Allen, J. S., Castro-Caldas, A., \line & Damasio, H. (2004). The scope of preserved \line procedural memory in amnesia. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain, 127}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  1853\'d01867.\par Celnik, P., Webster, B., Glasser, D. M., & Cohen, L. G. (2008). Effects of action observation on physical training after stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Stroke, 39, }{\fs16 1814\'d01820.\par }{\fs16 Chan, D. (2005). Current directions in personnel selection research. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in Psychological Science, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
14,}{\fs16  220\'d0224.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Chan, J. S. Y., Luo, Y., Yan, J. H., Cai, L., & Peng, K. (2015). Children\rquote s age modulates the effect of part and whole practice in motor learning.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Human Movement Science, 42}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 , 261\'d0272.\par Chan, L. K. H., & Hayward, W. G. (2009). Feature integration theory revisited: Dissociating feature detection and attentional guidance in visual search. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology:}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Human Perception and Performance, 35,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  119\'d0132.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Chang, Y., Lee, J-J., Seo, J-H., Song, H-J., Kim, Y-T., Lee, }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 H. J., }{\fs16 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  Kim, J. G. (2011). Neural correlates of motor }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 imagery for elite archers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NMR in Biomedicine, 24,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 366\'d0372.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par Chapman, G. J., Scally, A., & Buckley, J. G. (2012). Importance of binocular vision in foot placement accuracy when stepping onto a floor-based target during gait initiation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 216,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  71\'d080.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Chapman, P. R., & Underwood, G. (1998). Visual search of driving situations: Danger and experience. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perception, \line 27,}{\fs16  951\'d0964.\par Chapman, S. (1968). Catching a baseball. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Physics, 36,}
{\fs16  868\'d0870.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Chase, W. G., & Ericsson, K. A. (1982). Skill and working memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 The psychology of learning and motivation}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  (Vol. 16, pp. 1\'d058). New York, NY: \u173 ?
Academic Press.}{\fs16 \par Chen, H. H., Liu, Y. T., Mayer-Kress, G., & Newell, K. M. (2005). Learning the pedalo locomotion task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  247\'d0256.\par }{\fs16
Chen, Y. P., Kang, L. J., Chuang, T. Y., Doong, J. L., Lee, S. J., }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 Tsai, M. W., }{\fs16 .\'ca.\'ca.}{\fs16
 Sung, W. H. (2007). Use of virtual reality to improve upper extremity control in children with cerebral palsy: A single-subject design. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 87, }{\fs16 1441\'d01457.}{\fs16 \par Chen, L., Metcalfe, J. S., Jeka, J. J., & Clark, J. E. (2007). Two steps forward and one back: Learning to walk affects infants\rquote  sitting posture. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Infant Behavior & Development, 30,}{\fs16  16\'d025.\par Cherry, E. C. (1953). Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and two ears. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 25,}{\fs16  975\'d0979.\par Chieffi, S., Allport, D. A., & Woodfin, M. (1999). Hand-\u173 ?
centered coding of target location in visuospatial working memory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychologia, 37,}{\fs16
 495\'d0502.\par Chieffi, S., & Gentilucci, M. (1993). Coordination between the transport and the grasp components during prehension movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 50,}{\fs16  7\'d015.\par }{\fs16 Chiou, S-Y., Hurry, M., Reed, T., Quek, J. X., & Strutton, P. H. (2018). Cortical contributions to anticipatory postural adjustments in the trunk. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Journal of Physiology, 596}{\fs16 (7), 1295}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 1306.\par }{\fs16 Chiviakowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2002). Self-controlled feedback: Does it enhance learning because performers get feedback when they need it? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for \line Exercise and Sport, 73,}{\fs16  408\'d0415.\par Chiviakowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2005). Self-controlled feedback is effective if it is based on the learner\rquote s performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 76,}{\fs16  42\'d048.\par Chiviakowsky, S., & Wulf, G. (2007). Feedback after good \line trials enhances learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 78,}{\fs16  40\'d047.\par Cho, H. Y., Kim, J. S., & Lee, G. C. (2012). Effects of motor imagery training on balance and gait abilities in post-stroke patients: a randomized controlled trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical Rehabilitation, 27}{\fs16 (8), 675\'d0680.\par Chollet, D., Chalies, S., & Chatard, J.C. (2000). A new index of coordination for the crawl: Description and usefulness. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sports Medicine, 21,}{\fs16  54\'d059.\par Chollet, D., Micallef, J. P., & Rabischong, P. (1988). \line Biomechanical signals for external biofeedback to improve \line swimming techniques. In B. E. Ungerechts, K. Wilke, }
{\fs16 & \line K. Reichle (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Swimming science V}{\fs16  (pp. 389\'d0396). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.\par Chollet, D., Seifert, L. M., & Carter, M. (2008). Arm coordination in elite backstroke swimmers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 26,}{\fs16  675\'d0682.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Christakou, A., Zervas, Y., & Lavallee, D. (2007). The }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 adjunctive}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  role of imagery on the functional rehabilitation of a grade II ankle sprain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Human Movement Science, 26,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  141\'d0154.\par }{\fs16 Christina, R. W. (1973). Influence of enforced motor and \u173 ?
sensory sets on reaction latency and movement speed. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 44,}{\fs16  483\'d0487.\par Christina, R. W. (1992). The 1991 C. H. McCloy Research \u173 ?
Lecture: Unraveling the mystery of the response complexity effect. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 63,}
{\fs16  218\'d0230.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Christina, R. W., & Alpenfels, E. (2002). Why does traditional training fail to optimize playing performance? In E. Thain (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Science and golf IV: Proceedings of the World Scientific Congress of Golf}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
 (pp. 231\'d0245). New York, NY: Routledge.\par }{\fs16 Christina, R. W., }{\fs16 & Rose, D. J. (1985). Premotor and motor \u173 ?
response time as a function of response complexity. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 56,}
{\fs16  \line 306\'d0315.\par Chung, H. C., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2011). Postural responses to a moving room in children with and without developmental coordination disorder. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research in Developmental Disabilities, 32}{\fs16 , 2571\'d02576.\par Clark, J. E. (2007). On the problem of motor skill development. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance, \line 78, }{\fs16 39\'d044. \par Clark, J. E., & Metcalf, J.M. (2002). The mountain of motor development: A metaphor. In J. E. Clark & J. H. Humphrey (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor development: Research and reviews}{\fs16  (Vol. 2, pp. 163\'d0190). Reston, VA: National Association for Sport and Physical Education.\par Coca-Ugrinowitsch, A. A., Benda, R.N., Aburachid, L. M., Pereira de Andrade, A. G., Greco, P. J., Menzel, H. J. K., \line & Ugrinowitsch, H. (2014). Bandwidth knowledge of results on the learning of the saloon dart throwing task. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i Perceptual & Motor Skills}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 , 118}{\fs16 (2), 462\'d0474. \par Coelho, C. J., Studenka, B. E., & Rosenbaum, D. A. (2014). End-State comfort trumps handedness in object manipulation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 40}{\fs16 (2), 718\'d0730.\par Cockrell, D. L., Carnahan, H., }
{\fs16 & McFayden, B. J. (1995). A\u8239 ?preliminary analysis of the coordination of reaching, \u173 ?grasping, and walking. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perceptual and Motor Skills,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 81}{\fs16 , 515\'d0519.\par Cocks, M., Moulton, C. A., Luu, S., & Cil, T. (2014). What surgeons can learn from athletes: Mental practice in sports and surgery. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Surgical Education, 71}{\fs16 (2), 262\'d0269.\par Cohen, N. R., Cross, E. S., Wymbs, N. F., & Grafton, S. T. (2009). Transient disruption of M1 during response planning impairs subsequent offline consolidation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 196, }{\fs16 303\'d0309.\par }{\fs16 Cohen, R. G., & Rosenbaum, D. A. (2004). Where grasps are made reveals how grasps are planned: Generation and recall of motor plans. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 157,}{\fs16  486\'d0495.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Coker, C. A. (2006). Influence of target location on coincident timing performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 102,}
{\fs16  231}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 238.}{\fs16 \par Cole, G., Gellatly, A., & Blurton, B. (2001). Effect of object onset on the distribution of visual attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and \u173 ?Performance, 27,}{\fs16
 1356\'d01368.}{\fs16 \par Collins, D. F., Refshauge, K. M., Todd, G., & Gandevia, S. C. (2005). Cutaneous receptors contribute to kinesthesia at the index finger, elbow, and knee. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 94,}{\fs16  1699\'d01706.}{\fs16 \par Cook, T. W. (1936). Studies in cross education. V. Theoretical. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 43,}{\fs16  149\'d0178.\par Corbetta, D., & Bojczyk, K. E. (2002). Infants return to two-handed reaching when they are learning to walk. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 34, }{\fs16 83\'d095.\par }{\fs16 Corbetta D., & Thelen, E. (1996). The developmental origins of\u8239 ?
bimanual coordination: A dynamic perspective. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of\u8239 ?Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and \u173 ?
Performance, 22,}{\fs16  502}{\fs16 \'d0522.\par Cotterill, S. T., Collins, D., & Sanders, R. (2014). Developing effective pre-performance routines for golf performance: Implications for the coach. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Athletic Insight, 6}{\fs16 (1), 53\'d064.\par Cotterill, S.T., Sanders, R., & Collins, D. (2010). Developing effective pre-performance routines in golf: Why don\rquote t we ask the golfer? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 22}{\fs16 (1), 51\'d064.\par Coull, J., Trembley, L., Elliott, D., Weir, P. L., & Weeks, D. J. \line (2000). Monocular and binocular vision in the control of goal-directed movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 32,}{\fs16  347}{\fs16 \'d0360.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Cowan, N., Chen, Z., & Rouder, J. N. (2004). Constant capacity in an immediate serial-recall task: A logical sequel to Miller (1956). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 15,}{\fs16  634\'d0640.\par Craik, R., Herman, R. H., & Finley, F. R. (1976). The human solutions for locomotion: Interlimb coordination. In \line R. M. Herman, S. Grillner, & P. S. G. Stein (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neural control of locomotion}{\fs16  (pp. 51\'d063). New York, NY: Plenum.\par }{\fs16 Crews, D. J., }
{\fs16 & Landers, D. M. (1993). Electroencephalographic measures of attentional patterns prior to the golf putt. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 25,}{\fs16  116\'d0126.\par }{\fs16 Crocker, P. R. E., }{\fs16 & Dickinson, J. (1984). Incidental psycho-motor learning: The effects of number of movements, practice, and rehearsal. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 16,}{\fs16  61\'d075.}{\fs16 \par Cromwell, R. L., Newton, R. A., & Carlton, L. G. (2001). \u173 ?
Horizontal plane head stabilization during locomotor tasks. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 33,}{\fs16
 49\'d058.\par Cross, E. S., Schmitt, P. J., & Grafton, S. T. (2007). Neural substrates of contextual interference during motor learning support a model of active preparation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19,}{\fs16  303\'d0309.\par }{\fs16 Crossman, E. R. F. W. (1959). A theory of the acquisition of speed skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ergonomics, 2,}{\fs16  153\'d0166.}{\fs16 \par Crossman, E. R. F. W., & Goodeve, P. J. (1983). Feedback \u173 ?
control of hand movements and Fitts\rquote  law. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly \u173 ?Journal of Experimental Psychology, 35A,}
{\fs16  251\'d0278. \u173 ?(Original work published 1963)\par Crowell, H. P., Milner, C. E., Hamill, J., & Davis, I. S. (2010). Reducing impact loading during running with the use of real-time visual feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy, 40,}{\fs16  206\'d0213.\par }{\fs16 Cunnington, R., Windischberger, C., & Moser, E. (2005). }
{\fs16 Premotor}{\fs16  activity of the pre-supplementary motor area and the readiness for action: Studies of time-resolved event-related functional MRI. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Movement Science, 24,}{\fs16  644\'d0656.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Cutting, J. E. (1986). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perception with an eye for motion.}{\fs16  \u173 ?Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.}{\fs16 \par Cutting, J. E., & Kozlowski, L. T. (1977). Recognizing friends by their walk: Gait perception without familiarity cues. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 9,}{\fs16  353\'d0356.}{\fs16 \par Cutting, J. E., Vishton, P. M., & Braren, P. A. (1995). How we avoid collisions with stationary and moving objects. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 102,}{\fs16  627\'d0651.}{\fs16 \par Cutton, D. M., & Landin, D. (1994). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The effects of two \line cognitive learning strategies on learning the tennis forehand.}{\fs16
 Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Southern \u173 ?District American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance, Nashville, TN.}
{\fs16 \par Czerwinski, M., Lightfoot, N., & Shiffrin, R. A. (1992). Automatization and training in visual search. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
American Journal of Psychology, 105,}{\fs16  271\'d0315.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 D\rquote Innocenzo, G., Gonzalez, C. C., Williams, A. M., & Bishop, D. T. Looking to learn: The effects of visual guidance on observational learning of the golf swing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 One}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
 11}{\fs16 (5)}{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  e0155442.}{\fs16 \par Dail, T. K., & Christina, R. W. (2004). Distribution of \line practice and metacognition in learning and long-term retention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 75,}{\fs16  148\'d0155.}{\fs16 \par Daniels, F. S., & Landers, D. M. (1981). Biofeedback and shooting performance: A test of dysregulation and systems theory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport Psychology, 3,}{\fs16  271\'d0282.}{\fs16 \par Danion, F., Boyadjian, A., & Marin, L. (2000). Control of locomotion in expert gymnasts in the absence of vision. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 18,}{\fs16  809\'d0814.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Danna, J., & Velay, J.-L. (2015). Basic and supplementary sensory feedback in handwriting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology,}{\fs16  }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00169.}{\fs16 \par Davids, K. (1988). Developmental differences in the use of \u173 ?
peripheral vision during catching performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 20,}{\fs16  39\'d051.}
{\fs16 \par Davis, R. C. (1942). The pattern of muscular action in simple voluntary movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 31,}{\fs16  437\'d0466.}{\fs16 \par Davranche, K., Burle, B., Audiffren, M., & Hasbroucq, T. (2005). Information processing during physical exercise: A chronometric and electromyographic study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 165,}{\fs16  532\'d0540.\par }{\fs16 Decety, J. (1996). The neurophysiological basis of motor imagery. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Behavioural Brain Research, 77,}{\fs16  45}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 52.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1
Deeny, S., Hillman, C. H., Janelle, C. M., & Hatfield, B. D. (2003). Cortico-cortical communication and superior }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1
performance}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  in skilled marksmen: An EEG coherence analysis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Journal of Exercise & Sport Psychology, 25,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  188\'d0204.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 den Brinker, B. P. L. M., Stabler, J. R. L. W., Whiting, H. T. A., &}{\fs16  van Wieringen, P. C. (1986). The effect of manipulating knowledge of results in the learning of slalom-ski type ski movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ergonomics, 29,}{\fs16  31\'d040.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 de Oliveira, R.F., Oudejans, R.R.D., & Beek, P.J. (2008). Gaze behavior in basketball shooting: Further evidence of online visual control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 79}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 (3), 399\'d0404.\par }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3
Denis, D., Rowe, R., Williams, A. M., & Milne, E. (2017). The role of cortical sensorimotor oscillations in action anticipation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 146,}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  1102}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3
1114.}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \par }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 DeSmet, K., Segers, V., Lenoir, M., & DeClercq, D. (2009). Spatiotemporal characteristics of spontaneous overground walk-to-run transition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd1\expndtw3 Gait & Posture, 29}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 (1), 54\'d058.}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \par }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3
Di, X., Zhu, S., Jin, H., Wang, P., Ye, Z., Zhou, K., }{\fs16 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  Rao, H. (2012). Altered resting brain function and structure in professional badminton players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain Connectivity, 2,}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  225\'d0233. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0155442.\par }
{\fs16 Dickstein, R., & Deutsch, J. E. (2007). Motor imagery in physical therapy practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 87,}
{\fs16  942\'d0953.\par Dickstein, R., Dunsky, A., & Marcovitz, E. (2004). Motor imagery for gait rehabilitation in post-stroke hemiparesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 84,}{\fs16  1167\'d01177.\par Dickstein, R., Gazit-Grunwald, M., Plax, M., Dunsky, A., & Markovitz, E. (2005). EMG activity in selected target muscles during imagery rising on tiptoes in healthy adults and poststroke hemiparetic patients. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  475\'d0483.\par Dickstein, R., Shefi, S., Marcovitz, E., }
{\fs16 & Villa, Y. (2004). \u173 ?Anticipatory postural adjustments in selected trunk muscles in poststroke hemiparetic patients. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 85,}{\fs16  261\'d0267.}{\fs16 \par Diedrich, F. J., & Warren, W. H., Jr. (1995). Why change gaits? Dynamics of the walk-run transition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and \line Performance, 21,}{\fs16  183\'d0202.}
{\fs16 \par Diedrich, F. J., & Warren, W. H., Jr. (1998). The dynamics of gait transitions: Effects of grade and load. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Motor Behavior, 30,}{\fs16  60\'d078.}{\fs16 \par Dietz, V., M}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9f}{\fs16 ller, R., & Colombo, G. (2002). Locomotor activity in spinal man: Significance of afferent input from joint and load receptors. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain, 125,}{\fs16  2626\'d02634.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Diewert, G. L. (1975). Retention and coding in motor short-term memory: A comparison of storage codes for distance and location information. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 7,}{\fs16  183\'d0190.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Diewert, G. L., & Roy, E. A. (1978). Coding strategy for \line memory of movement extent information. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4,}{\fs16  666\'d0675.\par DiFabio, R. P., Zampieri, C., & Tuite, P. (2008). Gaze control and foot kinematics during stair climbing: Characteristics leading to fall risk in progressive supranuclear palsy. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 88,}{\fs16  240\'d0250.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Dinges, D. F., Pack, F., Williams, K., Gillen, K. A., Powell, J.\u8239 ?
W.,}{\fs16  Ott, G. E., .\'ca.\'ca. Pack, A. I. (1997). Cumulative sleepiness, mood disturbance, and psychomotor vigilance performance decrements during a week of sleep restricted to 4\'d05 hours per night. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Sleep, 20,}{\fs16  267\'d0277.\par DiRienzo, F., Chollet, C., Hoyek, N., & Guillot, A. (2014). Impact of neurological deficits on motor imagery: A systematic review of clinical evaluations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychological Review, 24}{\fs16 , 116\'d0147.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Dishman, R. K. (1993). Exercise adherence. In R. N. Singer, M. Murphy, & L. K. Tennant (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook of research on sport psychology}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  (pp.779\'d0798). New York, NY: Macmillan.\par }
{\fs16 Djordjevic. S., Valencic, V., Knez, N., & Erzen, I. (2001). The comparison of dynamic characteristics of skeletal \u173 ?
muscles in two groups of sportsmen\'d1sprinters and cyclists. \u173 ?}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Biomedical Engineering, 15,}
{\fs16  1\'d04.\par Donders, F. C. (1969). On the speed of mental processes. }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Translated and reprinted in }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 30,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  412\'d0431}{\fs16 . (Original work published 1868)\par }
{\fs16 Donker, S. F., Beek, P. J., Wagenaar, R. C., & Mulder, T. (2001). Coordination between arm and leg movements during \u173 ?
locomotion. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 33,}{\fs16  86\'d0102.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Donovan, J. J., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 & Radosevich, D. J. (1999). A meta-analytic review of the practice distribution effect: Now you see it, now you don\rquote t. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Psychology, 84,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  795\'d0805.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
\par }{\fs16 Doody, S. G., Bird, A. M., & Ross, D. (1985). The effect of \u173 ?auditory and visual models on acquisition of a timing task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 4,}{\fs16  271\'d0281.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Dordevic, M., Schrader, R., Taubert, M., M}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'9f}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 ller, P., H}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'9a}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
kelmann, A., & M}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'9f}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 ller, N. G. (2018). Vestibulo-hippocampal function is enhanced and brain structure altered in professional ballet dancers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 12,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  50. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00050.\par Doumas, M., Valkanidis, T. C., & Hatzitaki, V. (2019). Putting proprioception for balance to the test: Contrasting and combining sway referencing and tendon vibration. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gait & Posture, 67,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  201}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
206.\par Doyon, J., Bellec, P., Amsel, R., Penhune, V., Monchi, O., Carrier, J., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
 Benali, H. (2009). Contributions of the basal ganglia and functionally related brain structures to motor learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Behavioral Brain Research, 199,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  61\'d075.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Doyon, J., & Benali, H. (2005). Reorganization and plasticity \line in the adult brain during learning of motor skills. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 C}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 urrent \line Opinion in Neurobiology, 15}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
(2), 161\'d0167.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Doyon, J., Penhune, V., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2003). Distinct contribution of the cortico-striatal and cortico-cerebellar systems to motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Neuropsychologia, 41,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  252\'d0262.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16
Doyon, J., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2002). Functional anatomy of }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 motor skill learning. In L. R. Squire & D. L. Schacter (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychology of memory}{\fs16  (pp. 225}{\fs16 \'d0238). New York, NY: Guilford Press.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Draganski, B., Gaser, C., Busch, V., Schuierer, G., Bogdahn, U., \line }{\fs16 & May, A. (2004). Neuroplasticity: Changes in grey matter induced by training. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Nature, 427,}{\fs16  311\'d0312.\par Drews, F. A., Pasupathi, M., & Strayer, D. L. (2008). }{\fs16
Passenger}{\fs16  and cell phone conversations in simulated driving. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14, }
{\fs16 392\'d0400.\par Driediger, M., Hall, C., & Callow, N. (2006). Imagery use by injured athletes: A qualitative analysis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Sports Sciences, 24,}{\fs16  261}{\fs16 \'d0271.\par Driskell, J. E., Willis, R. P., & Copper, C. (1992). Effect of overlearning on retention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Psychology, 77,}{\fs16  615\'d0622.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Drowatzky, J. N., & Zuccato, F. C. (1967). Interrelationships between selected measures of static and dynamic balance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Research Quarterly, 38,}{\fs16  509\'d0510.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Drummond, S. P. A., Bischoff-Grethe, A., Dinges, D. F., \u173 ?
Ayalon, L.,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  Mednick, S. C., & Meloy, M. J. (2005). The neural basis of the Psychomotor Vigilance Task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Sleep, 28}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 ,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  1059\'d01068.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0
\par Duchateau, J., & Enoka, R. M. (2011). Human motor unit recordings: Origins and insight in the integrated motor system. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Brain Research, 1409, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 42\'d061.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \par }{\fs16 Dumbrowski, A., Backstein, D., Abughaduma, R., Leidl, D., & Carnahan, H. (2005). The influence of practice schedules in\u8239 ?}
{\fs16 the learning of a bone-plating surgical task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Surgery, 190,}{\fs16
 359\'d0363.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Durand, M., Geoffroi, V., Varray, A., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 & Pr}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1
\'8e}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 faut, C. (1994). Study of the energy correlates in the learning of a complex self-paced cyclical skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 13,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  785\'d0799.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }
{\fs16 Eason, R. G., Beardshall, A., & Jaffee, S. (1965). Performance and physiological indicants of activation in a vigilance \u173 ?
situation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 20,}{\fs16  3\'d013.}{\fs16 \par Edwards, R. V., & Lee, A. M. (1985). The relationship of cognitive style and instructional strategy to learning and transfer of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 56,}{\fs16  286\'d0290.}{\fs16 \par Egeth, H. E., & Yantis, S. (1997). Visual attention: Control, representation, and time course. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review of \line Psychology, 48,}{\fs16  269\'d0297.}{\fs16 \par Ehrsson, H. H., Geyer, S., & Naito, E. (2003). Imagery of voluntary movement of fingers, toes, and tongue activates corresponding body-part-specific motor representations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 90,}{\fs16  3304\'d03316.\par Ehrsson, H. H., Spence, C., & Passingham, R. E. (2004). That}
{\fs16 \rquote s my hand! Activity in the premotor cortex reflects feeling of ownership of a limb. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Science, 305,}{\fs16  875\'d0877.\par }{\fs16 El Lahib, M., Tekli, J., & Issa, Y. B. (2018). Evaluating Fitts}{\fs16 \rquote }{\fs16
 law on vibrating touch-screen to improve visual data accessibility for blind users. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 112,}
{\fs16  16\'d027.\par }{\fs16 Elder, D. M., Grossberg, S., & Mingolla, E. (2009). A neural model of visually guided steering, obstacle avoidance, and route selection. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 55}{\fs16 (5), 1501\'d01531.\par }
{\fs16 Elliott, D., & Allard, F. (1985). The utilization of visual \u173 ?infor\u173 ?mation and feedback information during rapid pointing movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental \u173 ?Psychol\u173 ?ogy,\u8239 ?37A,}{\fs16  407}{\fs16 \'d0425.\par Elliott, D., Helsen, W. F., & Chua, R. (2001). A century later: Woodworth\rquote s (1899) two-component model of goal-directed aiming. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Bulletin, 127}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  342\'d0357.\par Elliott, D., Zuberec, S., & Milgram, P. (1994). The effects of periodic visual occlusion on ball catching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  113\'d0122.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Emanuel, M., Jarus, T., & Bart, O. (2008). Effect of focus of attention and age on motor acquisition, retention, and transfer: A randomized trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Physical Therapy, 88,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  251\'d0260.\par }{\fs16 Enebo, B., & Sherwood, D. (2005). Experience and practice \u173 ?
organization in learning a simulated high-velocity low-\u173 ?amplitude task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics, 28,}
{\fs16  33\'d043.}{\fs16 \par Engel, K. C., Flanders, M., & Soechting, J. F. (1997). \line Anticipatory and sequential motor control in piano playing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 113,}{\fs16  189\'d0199.}{\fs16 \par Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive \u173 ?
attention. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in Psychological Science, \line 11,}{\fs16  19\'d023}{\fs16 .\par Enoka, R. M. (2008). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuromechanics of human movement}{\fs16  \line (4th ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.\par Ericsson, K. A. (1998). The scientific study of expert levels of performance: General implications for optimal learning and creativity. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 High Ability Studies, 9,}{\fs16  75\'d0100.\par Ericsson, K. A. (2008). Deliberate practice and acquisition of expert performance: A general overview. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Academic Emergency Medicine, 15, }{\fs16 988\'d0994.\par Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 102,}{\fs16  211\'d0245.\par }{\fs16 Ericsson, K. A., Krampe, R. T., }{\fs16
& Tesch-Romer, C. (1993). The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert \u173 ?performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Review, 100,}{\fs16  363\'d0406.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. (1996). Expert and exceptional performance: Evidence of maximal adaptation to task constraints. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Annual Review of Psychology, 47,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  273\'d0305.\par }{\fs16 Ericsson, K. A., & Smith, J. (1991). Prospects and limits of the\u8239 ?
empirical study of expertise: An introduction. In \line K. A. \u173 ?Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Toward a general theory of \u173 ?expertise: Prospects and limits}{\fs16  (pp. 1\'d038). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.}
{\fs16 \par Ericsson, K. A., & Williams, A. M. (2007). Capturing naturally occurring superior performance in the laboratory: Translational research on expert performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \line Experimental Psychology:}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Applied, 13,}
{\fs16  115\'d0123.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Ertelt, D., Small, S., Solodkin, A., Dettmers, C., McNamara, A., \line }{\fs16 Binkofski, F., & Buccino, G. (2007). Action observation has a positive impact on rehabilitation of motor deficits after stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 36,}{\fs16  T164\'d0T173.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Etnier, J. L., Whitwer, S. S., Landers, D. M., Petruzello, S. J., \line & Salazar, W. (1996). Changes in \u173 ?
electroencephalographic \u173 ?}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 activity associated with learning a novel motor task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67,}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  \line 272\'d0279.}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Eversheim, U., & Bock, O. (2002). The role of precues in the preparation of motor responses in humans. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of \u173 ?Motor Behavior, 34, }{\fs16 271}{\fs16 \'d0276.\par Fairweather, M. M., & Sidaway, B. (1993). Ideokinetic imagery as a postural development technique. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 64,}{\fs16  385}{\fs16 \'d0392.\par Falkmer, T., & Gregersen, N. P. (2005). A comparison of eye movement behavior of inexperienced and experienced \u173 ?
drivers in real traffic environments. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Optometry and Vision Science, 82}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
,}{\fs16  732\'d0739.\par Farinatti, P.T.V., & Monteiro, W. D. (2010). Walk-run transitions in your and older adults with special reference to the cardio-respiratory responses. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Journal of Applied Physiology, 109}{\fs16 (3),}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  }
{\fs16 379\'d0388.\par Farrow, D., & Abernethy, B. (2002). Can anticipatory skills be learned through implicit video-based perceptual training? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 20,}{\fs16  471\'d0485.\par Farrow, D., Abernethy, B., & Jackson, R. C. (2005). Probing \u173 ?
expert anticipation with the temporal occlusion paradigm: Experimental investigations of some methodological issues. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Motor Control, 9,}{\fs16  332\'d0351.\par }{\fs16 Farrow, D., Chivers, P., Hardingham, C., & Sachse, S. (1998). The effect of video-based perceptual training on the tennis return of serve. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 29,}{\fs16  36\'d043.\par Feltz, D. L. (1992). Understanding motivation in sport: A self-efficacy perspective. In G. C. Roberts (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Motivation in sport and exercise}{\fs16  (pp. 93\'d0127). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.\par }
{\fs16 Feltz, D. L., & Payment, C. A. (2005). Self-efficacy beliefs \u173 ?related to movement and mobility. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Quest, 57,}{\fs16  24\'d036.\par F}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8e}{\fs16 ry, Y. A. (2003). Differentiating visual and kinesthetic \u173 ?
imagery in mental practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Canadian Journal of \line Experimental Psychology, 57}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
,}{\fs16  1\'d010.\par }{\fs16 Field-Fote, E. C. (2000). Spinal cord control of movement: \u173 ?Implications for locomotor rehabilitation following spinal cord injury. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 80,}{\fs16  477\'d0484.\par }{\fs16 Fink, A., Graif, B., & Neubauer, A. C. (2009). Brain correlates underlying creative thinking: EEG alpha activity in professional vs. novice dancers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 46,}{\fs16  854\'d0862.\par Fischman, M. G. (1984). Programming time as a function of number of movement parts and changes in movement direction. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 16,}{\fs16  405\'d0423.}{\fs16 \par Fischman, M. G., & Schneider, T. (1985). Skill level, vision, and proprioception in simple one-hand catching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 17,}{\fs16  219\'d0229.}{\fs16 \par Fischman, M. G., Stodden, D. F., & Lehman, D. M. (2003). The end-state comfort effect in bimanual grip selection. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 74,}{\fs16  17\'d024.}{\fs16 \par Fischman, M. G., Yao, W. X., & Reeve, T. G. (2000). Directional accuracy demands in the response complexity effect: Tests of subtended angle and tolerant width. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Human Movement Studies, 39,}{\fs16  295\'d0310.}{\fs16 \par Fisher, R., Galea, M., Brown, P., & Lemon, R. (2002). Digital nerve anaesthesia decreases EMG-EMG coherence in a \u173 ?
human precision grip task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 145, }{\fs16 207\'d0214.}{\fs16 \par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Fishman, S., & Tobey, C. (1978). Augmented feedback. In \line W. \u173 ?Anderson & G. Barrette (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 What\rquote s going on in gym: \u173 ?Descriptive studies of physical education classes}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
 (pp. 51\'d062). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Motor Skills: Theory into Practice,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  Monograph 1.\par }
{\fs16 Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human \u173 ?motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47,}{\fs16  381\'d0391.\par Fitts, P. M., & Posner, M. I. (1967). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human performance.}{\fs16  \u173 ?Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Fleishman, E. A. (1967). Performance assessment based on an empirically derived task taxonomy. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Factors, 9,}{\fs16  349\'d0366.}{\fs16 \par Fleishman, E. A. (1972). On the relationship between abilities, learning, and human performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Psychologist, 27,}{\fs16  1017\'d01032.}{\fs16 \par Fleishman, E. A., & Quaintance, M. K. (1984). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Taxonomies of human performance.}{\fs16  Orlando, FL: Academic Press.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Fleisig, G. S., Excamilla, R. F., Andrews, J. R., Matsuo, T., \u173 ?
Satterwhite, Y., & Barrentine, S. W. (1996). Kinematic and \u173 ?kinetic comparison between baseball pitching and football passing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 12,}{\fs16  207\'d0224.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Flinn, N. (1995). A task-oriented approach to the treatment of a client with hemiplegia. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 49,}{\fs16  560\'d0569.}{\fs16 \par Fogassi, L., & Luppino, G. (2005). Motor functions of the parietal lobe. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 15,}{\fs16  626\'d0631.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Ford, M. P}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 .}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 , Wagenaar, R. C., & Newell, K. M. (2007). The effects of auditory rhythms and instruction on walking patterns in individuals post stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Gait & Posture, 26,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  150\'d0155.\par }{\fs16 Ford, P., Hodges, N. J., & Williams, A.M. (2005). Online attentional-focus manipulations in a soccer-dribbling task: Implications for the proceduralization of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  386\'d0394.\par Ford, P., Hodges, N. J., & Williams, A. M. (2007). Examining action effects in the execution of a skilled soccer kick by using erroneous feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, \line 39,}{\fs16  481\'d0490.\par }{\fs16 Frank, R. M., Wang, K. C., Davey, A., Cotter, E. J., Cole, B. J., Romeo, A. A.}
{\fs16  .\'ca.\'ca. }{\fs16 & Verma, N. N. (2018). Utility of modern arthroscopic simulator training models: A meta-analysis and updated systematic review. Arthroscopy: }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Journal of Arthroscopic & Related Surgery, 34}{\fs16 (5), 1650\'d01677.\par }{\fs16 Franks, I. M., & Maile, L. J. (1991). The use of video in sport skill acquisition. In P. W. Dowrick (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Practical guide \line to using video in the behavioral sciences}{\fs16  (pp. 105\'d0124). New York, NY: Wiley.}
{\fs16 \par Franks, I. M., & Wilberg, R. B. (1982). The generation of movement patterns during the acquisition of a pursuit \u173 ?
tracking task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 1,}{\fs16  251\'d0272.}{\fs16 \par Fredenberg, K. B., Lee, A. M., & Solmon, M. L. (2001). The effect of augmented feedback on students\rquote  perceptions and performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72,}{\fs16  232}{\fs16 \'d0242.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
French, K. E., Rink, J. E., & Werner, P. H. (1990). Effects of contextual interference on retention of three volleyball skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 71,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  179\'d0186.\par Fritz, S. L., Butts, R. J., & Wolf, S. L. (2012). Constraint-induced movement therapy: From history to plasticity. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Expert Reviews in Neurotherapy, 12}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 (2), 191\'d0198.\par Fuji, S., Kudo, K., Ohtsuki, T., & Oda, S. (2010). Intrinsic constraint of asymmetry acting as a control parameter on rapid, rhythmic bimanual coordination: A study of professional drummers and nondrummers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 104}{\fs16 (4),}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  2178\'d02186.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Fukui, T., & Inui, T. (2006). The effect of viewing the moving limb and target object during the early phase of movement on the online control of grasping. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Human Movement Science, \line 25, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 349\'d0371.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
Gabbett, T., Wake, M., & Abernethy, B. (2011). Use of dual-}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 task methodology for skill assessment and development: Examples from rugby league. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 29}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 (1),}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
 }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 7\'d018.\par }{\fs16 Gabriel, D. A., & Boucher, J. P. (1998). Practice effects on the timing and magnitude of agonist activity during ballistic \u173 ?
elbow flexion to a target. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  30\'d037.\par Gal}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'87}{\fs16 n, F., Nuttin, M., Lew, E., Ferrez, P.W., Vanacker, G., Philips, J., & Mil}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'87}{\fs16 n, J. (2008). A brain actuated wheelchair: Asynchronous and non-invasive brain-computer interfaces for continuous control of robots. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical Neurophysiology, 119,}{\fs16  2159\'d02169.\par Gallagher, A. G., McClure, N., McGuigan, J., Crothers, I., }
{\fs16 & Browning, J. (1999). Virtual reality training in laparoscopic surgery: A preliminary assessment of minimally invasive surgical trainer virtual reality (MIST VR). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Endoscopy, 31,}{\fs16  310\'d0314.\par Gallagher, J. D., }{\fs16 & Thomas, J. R. (1980). Effects of varying post-KR intervals upon children\rquote s motor performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 12,}{\fs16  41\'d046.\par Gautier, G., Thouvarecq, R., & Chollet, D. (2007). Visual and postural control of an arbitrary posture: The handstand.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Journal of Sports Sciences, 25,}{\fs16  1271\'d01278.}{\fs16 \par Gaveau, V., Pisella, L., Priot, A. E., Fukui, T., Rossetti, Y., P}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8e}{\fs16 lisson, D., & Prablanc, C. (2014). Automatic online control of motor adjustments in reaching and grasping. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychologia, 55}{\fs16 , 25\'d040.\par }{\fs16 Gentile, A. M. (1972). A working model of skill acquisition with application to teaching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Quest,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Monograph, 17,}{\fs16  }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16
3\'d023.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Gentile, A. M. (1987). Skill acquisition: Action, movement, and neuromotor processes. In J. H. Carr, R. B. Shepherd, J. \line \u173 ?
Gordon, A. M. Gentile, & J. M. Hinds (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Movement science: Foundations for physical therapy in rehabilitation}
{\fs16  (pp. 93\'d0154). Rockville, MD: Aspen.}{\fs16 \par Gentile, A. M. (2000). Skill acquisition: Action, movement, and neuromotor processes. In J. H. Carr & R. B. Shepherd (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Movement science: Foundations for physical therapy}{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp. 111\'d0187). Rockville, MD: Aspen.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gentilucci, M., Chieffi, S., Scarpa, M., & Castiello, U. (1992). Temporal coupling between transport and grasp components during prehension movements: Effect of \u173 ?
visual \u173 ?perturbation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Behavioural Brain Research, 47,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  71\'d082.}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Gentilucci, M., Toni, I., Daprati, E., & Gangitano, M. (1997). Tactile input of the hand and the control of reaching to grasp movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Experimental Brain Research, 114,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  130\'d0137.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4
\par }{\fs16 Ghai, S., Ghai, I., Schmitz, G., & Effenberg, A.O. (2018). Effect of rhythmic auditory cueing on parkinsonian gait: A systematic review and meta-analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Scientific Reports, 8}{\fs16 , }{\fs16 506. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-16232-5.\par Giacosa, C., Karpati, F. J., Foster, N. E. V., Penhune, V. B., & Hyde, K. L. (2016). Dance and music training have different effects on white matter diffusivity in sensorimotor pathways. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroimage, 135,}{\fs16  273\'d0286.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Giblin, G., Farrow, D., Reid, M., Ball, K., & Abernethy, B. (2015). Exploring the kinaesthetic sensitivity of skilled \line performers for implementing movement instructions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 41}{\fs16 , 76\'d091.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Giboin, L-S., Gruber, M., & Kramer, A. (2015). Task-specificity of balance training. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Human Movement Science, 44, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 22}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
31.\par }{\fs16 Gibson, J. J. (1966). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The senses considered as perceptual \u173 ?systems.}{\fs16
 Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Gibson, J. J. (1979). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The ecological approach to visual \line perception.}{\fs16  Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Giese, M. A., & Rizzolatti, G. (2015). Neural and computational mechanisms of action processing: Interaction between visual and motor representations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Neuron, 88}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 (1), 167\'d0180.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Gilpin, H. R., Moseley, G. L., Stanton, T. R., & Newport, R. (2015). Evidence for distorted mental representation of the hand in osteoarthritis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Rheumatology, 54}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 (4), 678\'d0682.\par }{\fs16 Gladwell, M. (1996). The physical genius: What do Wayne Gretsky, Yo-Yo Ma, and a brain surgeon named Charlie Wilson have in common? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The New Yorker, }{\fs16 August 2}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 .}{\fs16 \par Gleick, J. (1987). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Chaos: Making a new science.}{\fs16  New York, NY: Viking Penguin.\par }{\fs16 Gobel, E. W., Parrish, T. B., & Reber, P. J. (2011). Neural correlates of skill acquisition: Decreased cortical activity during a serial interception sequence learning task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 58, }{\fs16 1150\'d01157. \par Goebl, W., & Palmer, C. (2008). Tactile feedback and timing accuracy in piano performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 186,}{\fs16  471\'d0479.\par Goldberger, M., & Gerney, P. (1990). Effects of learner use of practice time on skill acquisition of fifth grade children. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 10,}{\fs16  84\'d095.\par Goldfield, E. C., Kay, B. A., & Warren, W. H., Jr. (1993). Infant bouncing: The assembly and tuning of action systems. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Child Development, 64,}{\fs16  1128\'d01142.\par Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual pathways for perception and action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Trends in Neurosciences, 15,}{\fs16  20\'d025.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Goodale, M. A., & Servos, P. (1996). Visual control of \u173 ?
prehension. In H. N. Zelaznik (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Advances in motor learning and control}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
 (pp. 87\'d0121). Champaign, IL: \u173 ?Human Kinetics.\par }{\fs16 Goode, S. L., }{\fs16 & Magill, R. A. (1986). The contextual interference effect in learning three badminton serves. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 57,}{\fs16  308\'d0314.\par Goodman, M. J., Tijerina, L., Bents, F. D., }
{\fs16 & Wierwille, W. W. \line (1999). Using cellular telephones in vehicles: Safe or \u173 ?unsafe? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Transportation Human Factors, 1,}{\fs16  3\'d042.}{\fs16 \par Goodwin, J. E., & Meeuwsen, H. J. (1995). Using bandwidth knowledge of results to alter relative frequencies during motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 66,}{\fs16  99\'d0104.}{\fs16 \par Gopher, D., Weil, M., & Siegel, D. (1989). Practice under changing priorities: An approach to the training of complex skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 71,}{\fs16  147\'d0177.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Gordon, A. M., Charles, J., & Wolf, S. L. (2005). Methods of constraint-induced movement therapy for children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy: Development of a child-friendly intervention for improving upper-extremity function. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 86,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  837\'d0844.\par }
{\fs16 Gordon, A. M., Schneider, J. A., Chinnan, A., & Charles, J. R. (2007). Efficacy of a hand-arm bimanual intensive therapy (HABIT) in children with hemiplegic cerebral palsy: a randomized controlled trial. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 49,}{\fs16  830}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 838.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Gordon, A. M., & Soechting, J. F. (1995). Use of tactile \line afferent information in sequential finger movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 107,}{\fs16  281\'d0292.\par Gorelick, M. L., & Brown, J. M. M. (2007). Mechanomyographic assessment of contractile properties within seven segments of the human deltoid muscle. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Journal of Applied Physiology, 100, }{\fs16 35\'d044.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Goss, S., Hall, C., Buckolz, E., & Fishburne, G. (1986). Imagery ability and the acquisition and retention of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory and Cognition, 14,}{\fs16  469\'d0477.}{\fs16 \par Gottlieb, J. (2007). From thought to action: The parietal cortex as a bridge between perception, action, and cognition. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuron, 53, }{\fs16 9\'d016.\par Goulet, C., Bard, C., & Fleury, M. (1989). Expertise differences in preparing to return a tennis serve: A visual information processing approach. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  382}{\fs16 \'d0398.\par Grafton, S. T., Hazeltine, E., & Ivry, R. B. (2002). Motor \u173 ?
sequence learning with the nondominant left hand. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 146}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
,}{\fs16  369\'d0378.\par Graci, V. (2011). The role of lower peripheral visual cues in the visuomotor coordination of locomotion and prehension. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gait & Posture, 34}{\fs16 (4), 514\'d0518.\par Grand, K. F., Bruzi, A. T., Dyke, F. B., Goodwin, M., \line Leiker, A. M., Thompson, A. G., & Miller, M. W. (2015). Why self-controlled feedback enhances motor learning: Answers from electroencephalography and indices of motivation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 43}{\fs16 , 23\'d032.\par Grant, S. (2015). Gaze -grasp coordination in obstacle avoidance: Differences between binocular and monocular viewing.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Experimental Brain Research}{\fs16 , 1\'d017.\par }{\fs16 Graser, J. V., Bastiaenen, C. H. G., van Hedel, H. J. A. (2019)}
{\fs16 .}{\fs16  The role of the practice order: A systematic review about contextual interference in children. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
PLoS }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 One,}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  14}{\fs16 (1)}{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  e0209979. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0209979\par }
{\fs16 Gray, R. (2004). Attending to the execution of a complex sensorimotor skill: Expertise differences, choking, and slumps. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
10}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 ,}{\fs16  42\'d054.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Gray, R. (2011). Links between attention, performance pressure, and movement in skilled motor action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20}{\fs16 (5),}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
 }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 301\'d0306.\par }{\fs16 Gray, R. (2017). Transfer of training from virtual to real baseball batting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Frontiers in Psychology, 8}{\fs16  (2183). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02183.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Green, C. S., & Bavilier, D. (2003). Action video game modifies visual selective attention. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Nature, 423,}{\fs16  534\'d0537.\par Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2006). Effect of action video games on the spatial distribution of visuospatial attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 32,}{\fs16  1465\'d01478.\par }
{\fs16 Green, T. D., }{\fs16 & Flowers, J. H. (1991). Implicit versus explicit learning processes in a probabilistic, continuous fine-motor catching task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 23,}{\fs16  293\'d0300.\par Gr}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8f}{\fs16 zes, J., & Decety, J. (2001). Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation, observation, and verb generation of actions: A meta-analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Brain Mapping, 12,}{\fs16  1\'d019.\par }{\fs16 Grillner, S. (1981). Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, and fish. In V. B. Brooks (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook of physiology}{\fs16  (Sec. 1, Vol. II, Part 2, pp. 1179\'d01236). Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society.\par Grillner, S. (1985). Neurobiological bases of rhythmic motor acts in vertebrates. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science, 228,}{\fs16  143\'d0148.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Grossberg, S., & Paine, R.W. (2000). A neural model of corti\u173 ?cocerebellar interactions during attentive imitation and \u173 ?
predictive learning of sequential handwriting movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neural Networks, 13,}{\fs16  999\'d01046.\par }
{\fs16 Guadagnoli, M. A., Dornier, L. A., & Tandy, R. D. (1996). \u173 ?Optimal length for summary knowledge of results: The \u173 ?
influence of task-related experience and complexity. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67,}
{\fs16  239\'d0248.\par }{\fs16 Guadagnoli, M. A., Holcomb, W., & Davis., M. (2002). The efficacy of video feedback for learning the golf swing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 20,}{\fs16  615\'d0622.\par Guadagnoli, M. A., & Lee, T. D. (2004). Challenge point: A framework for conceptualizing the effects of various practice conditions in motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 36, }{\fs16 212\'d0224.\par Guadagnoli, M. A., Leis, B., Van Gemmert, A.W. A., }
{\fs16 & \u173 ?Stelmach, G. E. (2002). The relationship between knowledge of \u173 ?results and motor learning in Parkinsonian patients. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Parkinsonism and Related Disorders, 9,}{\fs16  89\'d095.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Guay, M., Salmoni, A., & Lajoie, Y. (1999). The effects of \u173 ?
different knowledge of results spacing and summarizing techniques on the acquisition of a ballistic movement. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}{\fs16  24\'d032.\par Guerin, P., & Bardy, B. (2008). Optical modulation of locomotion and energy expenditure at preferred transition speed. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 189, }{\fs16 393\'d0402.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Guerra, Z. F., Lucchetti, A. L. G., & Luchetti, G. (2017). Motor imagery training after stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy, 41,}{\fs16  205}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 214.}{\fs16 \par }
{\fs16 Guerraz, M., & Day, B. L. (2005). Expectation and the vestibular control of balance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17,}
{\fs16  463\'d0469.}{\fs16 \par Guillot, A., Hoyek, N., Louis, M., & Collet, C. (2012). Learning by thinking: Review and future directions for the timing of imagined movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 5,}{\fs16  3\'d022.\par Gysin, P., Kaminski, T. R., & Gordon, A. M. (2003). Coordination of fingertip forces in object transport during locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 149,}{\fs16  371}{\fs16 \'d0379.\par Hagman, J. D. (1978). Specific-cue effects of interpolated movements on distance and location retention in short-\line term motor memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory and Cognition, 6,}{\fs16  \line 432\'d0437.\par }{\fs16 Haines, T., Kuys, S.}{\fs16  }
{\fs16 S., Morrison, G., Clarke, J., Bew, P., & McPhail, S. (2007). Development and validation of the }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 Balance }
{\fs16 Outcome Measure for Elder Rehabilitation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 88, }
{\fs16 1614\'d01621.}{\fs16 \par Hall, C. R., Buckolz, E., & Fishburne, G. (1992). Imagery and the acquisition of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Canadian Journal of Sport \u173 ?Science, 17,}{\fs16  19\'d027.}{\fs16 \par Hall, C. R., & Martin, K. A. (1997). Measuring movement \u173 ?
imagery abilities: A revision of the Movement Imagery Questionnaire. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Mental Imagery, 21,}
{\fs16  143}{\fs16 \'d0154.\par }{\fs16 Hall, C. R., & Pongrac, J. (1983). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Movement }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
i}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 magery }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 \line q}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 uestionnaire.}
{\fs16  London, Ontario, Canada: University of Western \u173 ?Ontario.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Hall, C. R., Rodgers, W. M., & Barr, K. A. (1990). The use of imagery by athletes in selected sports. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Sport Psychologist, 4,}{\fs16  1\'d010.}{\fs16 \par Hall, K. G., Domingues, D. A., & Cavazos, R. (1994). \line Contextual interference effects with skilled baseball \line players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 78,}{\fs16  835}{\fs16 \'d0841.\par Hall, S. J. (2003). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Basic biomechanics}{\fs16  (4th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.\par }{\fs16 Hall, S. J. (2019). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Basic biomechanics}{\fs16  (8th ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.\par }{\fs16 Halsband, U., & Lange, R. K. (2006). Motor learning in man: A review of functional and clinical studies. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Journal of Physiology\'d1Paris, 99,}{\fs16  414\'d0424.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Hamill, J., van Emmerik, R. E. A., Heiderscheidt, B. C., & Li, L.}
{\fs16  (1999). A dynamical systems approach to lower extremity running injuries. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical Biomechanics, 14,}
{\fs16  297\'d0308.}{\fs16 \par Hamilton, W. (1859). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Lectures on metaphysics and logic.}{\fs16
 \u173 ?Edinburgh, Scotland: Blackwood.\par Hanakawa, T., Dimyan, M. A., & Hallett, M. (2008). Motor planning, imagery, and execution in the distributed motor network: A time-course study with functional MRI. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebral Cortex, 18,}{\fs16  2775\'d02788.}{\fs16 \par Hancock, G. R., Butler, M. S., & Fischman, M. G. (1995). On the problem of two-dimensional error scores: Measures and analyses of accuracy, bias, and consistency. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Motor Behavior, 27,}{\fs16  241\'d0250.}{\fs16 \par Hancock, P. A., Oron-Gilad, T., & Szalma, J. L. (2007). Elaborations of the multiple-resource theory of attention. In \line A. F. Kramer, D. A. Weigmann, & A. Kirlik (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Attention: From theory to practice }{\fs16 (pp. 45\'d056). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.\par Hand, J., & Sidaway, B. (1993). Relative frequency of modeling effects on the performance and retention of a motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 64,}{\fs16  122\'d0126.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 H}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'8a}{\fs16 nggi, J., Koeneke, S., Bezzola, L., & J}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8a}{\fs16 ncke, L. (2010). Structural neuroplasticity in the sensorimotor network of professional female ballet dancers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Brain Mapping, 31,}{\fs16  1196\'d01206.}{\fs16 \par Hanlon, R. E. (1996). Motor learning following unilateral stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 77,}{\fs16  811\'d0815.\par }{\fs16 Hardwick, R. M., Caspers, S., Eickhoff, S. B., & Swinnen, }
{\fs16 S. P.}{\fs16  (2018). Neural correlates of action: Comparing meta-analyses of imagery, observation, and execution. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 94,}{\fs16  31}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 44.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Harlow, H. F. (1949). The formation of learning sets. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 56,}{\fs16
 51\'d065.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Harris, J.E., & Herbert, A. (2015). Utilization of motor imagery in upper limb rehabilitation: A systematic scoping review.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Clinical Rehabilitation, 29}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 (11), 1092\'d01107.\par Harrison, A., Derwent, G., Enticknap, A., Rose, F. D., & \u173 ?
Attree, E. A. (2002). The role of virtual reality technology in the assessment and training of inexperienced powered wheelchair users. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Disability and Rehabilitation, 24,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  599\'d0606.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Haskins, M. J. (1965). Development of a response recognition training film in tennis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 21,}{\fs16  207\'d0211.}{\fs16 \par Hatfield, B. D., Haufler, A. J., Hung, T. M., & Spalding, T. W. \line (2004). Electroencephalographic studies of skilled \u173 ?
psycho\u173 ?motor performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 21,}{\fs16  144\'d0156.}
{\fs16 \par Hatfield, B. D., & Hillman, C. H. (2001). The psychophysiology of sport: A mechanistic understanding of the psychology of superior performance. In R. N. Singer, C. H. Hausenblas, & C. M. Janelle (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook on sport }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 psychology}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  (2nd ed., pp. 362}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0386). New York, NY: Wiley.}{\fs16 \par Hautala, R. M. (1988). Does transfer of training help children learn juggling? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 67,}{\fs16  563\'d0567.\par Hautala, R. M., & Conn, J. H. (1993). A test of Magill\rquote s closed to open continuum for skill development. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 77,}{\fs16  219\'d0226.\par Hawking, S. (1996). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
The illustrated brief history of time.}{\fs16  New York, NY: Bantam Books.\par Hays, R. T., & Vincenzi, D. A. (2000). Fleet assessments of a virtual reality training system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Military Psychology, 12}{\fs16 (3),}{\fs16  161\'d0186.\par Healy, A. F., & McNamara, D. S. (1996). Verbal learning and memory: Does the modal model still work? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review of Psychology, 47,}{\fs16  143\'d0172.\par Heath, M., Neely, K., & Krigolson, O. (2008). Response modes influence the accuracy of monocular and binocular reaching movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 12,}{\fs16  252\'d0266.\par }{\fs16 Hebert, E. (2018). The effects of observing a learning model (or two) on motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Learning and Development, 6,}{\fs16  4}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 17.}{\fs16 \par Hebert, E., Landin, D., & Menickelli, J. (1998). Videotape feedback: What learners see and how they use it. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of\u8239 ?Sport Pedagogy, 4,}{\fs16  12\'d028.\par Hebert, E. P., & Landin, D. (1994). Effects of a learning model and augmented feedback on tennis skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  250\'d0257.\par }{\fs16 Hebert, E. P., Landin, D., }
{\fs16 & Solmon, M. A. (1996). Practice schedule effects on the performance and learning of \u173 ?\u173 ?low-and high-skilled students: An applied study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67,}{\fs16  52\'d058.\par Hebert, E. P., Landin, D., }
{\fs16 & Solmon, M. A. (2000). The impact of task progressions on students\rquote  practice quality and task-}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
related thoughts. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 19,}{\fs16  338\'d0354.}{\fs16 \par Heise, G. D. (1995). EMG changes in agonist muscles during practice of a multijoint throwing skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 5,}{\fs16  81\'d094.}{\fs16 \par Heise, G. D., & Cornwell, A. (1997). Relative contributions to the net joint moment for a planar multijoint throwing skill: Early and late in practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  116\'d0124.\par }{\fs16 Helsen, W., & Pauwels, J. M. (1990). Analysis of visual search activity in solving tactical game problems. In D. Brogan (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Visual search}{\fs16  (pp. 177\'d0184). London: Taylor & \u173 ?Francis.\par Helsen, W. F., Elliott, D., Starkes, J. L., & Ricker, K. L. (1998). Temporal and spatial coupling of point of gaze and hand movements in aiming. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 30,}{\fs16  249\'d0259.}{\fs16 \par Helsen, W. F., Elliott, D., Starkes, J. L., & Ricker, K. L. (2000). Coupling of eye, finger, elbow, and shoulder movements during manual aiming. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 32,}{\fs16  241\'d0248.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Henderson, J. (1996). Visual attention and the attention-action interface. In K. Akins (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception}{\fs16  (pp. 290\'d0316). \line New York, NY: Oxford University Press.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Henneman, E. (1957). Relationship between size of neurons and their susceptibility to discharge. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Science, 126, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 1345\'d01347.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Henry, F. M. (1960). Influence of motor and sensory sets on \u173 ?
reaction latency and speed of discrete movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 31,}{\fs16  459\'d0468.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Henry, F. M. (1961a). Stimulus complexity, movement complexity, age, and sex in relation to reaction latency and speed in limb movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly, 32,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  353\'d0366.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Henry, F. M. (1961b). Reaction time\'d0movement time correlations. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 12,}
{\fs16  63\'d066.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Henry, F. M., & Rogers, D. E. (1960). Increased response \u173 ?latency for complicated movements and the \ldblquote memory drum\rdblquote  theory of neuromotor reaction. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Research Quarterly, 31,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  448\'d0458.\par }{\fs16 Herbert, W. J., Heiss, D. G., & Basso, D. M. (2008). Influence of feedback schedule in motor performance and learning of a lumbar multifidus muscle task using rehabilitative ultrasound imaging: A randomized clinical trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 88,}{\fs16  261\'d0269.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Herbort, O., & Kunde, W. (}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 2019}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 )}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 .}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  Precise movements in awkward postures: A direct test of the precision hypothesis of the end-state comfort effect. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  \line }{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 DOI: 10.1037/xhp0000639}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par Hershler, O., & Hochstein, S. (2005). At first sight: A high-level pop out effect for faces. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Vision Research, 45}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  1707\'d01724.\par }{\fs16 Heuer, H. (1991). Invariant relative timing in motor-program theory. In J. Fagard & P. H. Wolff (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The development of timing control and temporal organization in coordinated action}{\fs16  (pp. 37\'d068). Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par Hick, W. E. (1952). On the rate of gain of information. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quar\u173 ?terly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4,}{\fs16  11\'d026.\par Hicks, R. E., Gualtieri, T. C., & Schroeder, S. R. (1983). Cognitive and motor components of bilateral transfer. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Psychology, 96,}{\fs16  223\'d0228.\par Higgins, J. R. (1977). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human movement:}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 An integrated approach.}{\fs16  St. Louis, MO: Mosby.\par Higgins, S. (1991). Motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 71,}{\fs16  48\'d064.\par Hinds, P. J., Patterson, M., & Pfeffer, J. (2001). Bothered by \u173 ?
abstraction: The effect of expertise on knowledge transfer and subsequent novice performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86,}{\fs16  1232\'d01243.\par Hird, J. S., Landers, D. M., Thomas, J. R., }{\fs16 & Horan, J. J. (1991). }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical practice is superior to mental practice in enhancing}{\fs16  cognitive and motor task performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 13,}{\fs16  281\'d0293.\par Hodges, N. J., Hayes, S., Breslin, G., & Williams, A. M. (2005). An evaluation of the minimal constraining information during movement observation and reproduction. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 119,}{\fs16  264\'d0282.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Hodges, N. J., Kerr, T., Starkes, J. L., Weir, P. L., & Nananidou,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  A.}{\fs16  (2004). Predicting performance times from deliberate practice hours for triathletes and swimmers: What, when, and where is practice important? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 10,}{\fs16  219\'d0237.}{\fs16 \par Hodges, N. J., Williams, A. M., Hayes, S. J., & Breslin, G. (2007). What is modeled during observational learning? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 25,}{\fs16  531\'d0545.\par Hoenkamp, H. (1978). Perceptual cues that determine the label-ing of human gait. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 4,}{\fs16  \line 59\'d069.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Holden, M. K. (2005). Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation: Review. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 CyberPsychology & Behavior, 8,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  187\'d0211.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }{\fs16 Hollands, K. L., Pelton, T. A., Tyson, S. F., Hollands, M. A., & van Vliet, P. M. (2012). Interventions for coordination of walking following stroke: Systematic review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gait & \line Posture, 35}{\fs16 (3), 349\'d0359.\par Hollands, M. A., Patla, A. E., & Vickers, J. N. (2002). \ldblquote Look where you\rquote re going!\rdblquote : Gaze behaviour associated with maintaining and changing the direction of locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 143,}{\fs16  221\'d0230.\par }{\fs16 Holmes, P. S., & Wright, D. J. (2017). Motor cognition and neuroscience in sport psychology. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Opinion in Psychology, 16,}{\fs16  43}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 47.\par }{\fs16 Holt, K. G., & Jeng, S. F., Ratcliffe, R., }
{\fs16 & Hamill, J. (1995). Energetic cost and stability during human walking at the preferred stride frequency. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Journal of Motor Behavior, 27,}{\fs16  164\'d0178.}{\fs16 \par Holt, K. G., Ratcliffe, R., & Jeng, S. (1999). Head stability in walking in children with cerebral palsy and in children and adults without neurological impairment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 79,}{\fs16  1153\'d01162.\par }{\fs16 Honda, T., Hagao, S., Hashimoto, Y., Ishikawa, K., Yokota, T., Mizusawa, H., & Ito, M. (2018). Tandem internal models execute motor learning in the cerebellum. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115}{\fs16 (28), 7428}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 7433.}
{\fs16 \par Horn, R. R., Scott, M. A., Williams, A. M., }{\fs16 & Hodges, N. J. (2005). Visual search and coordination changes in response to video and point-light demonstrations without KR. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  265\'d0274.}{\fs16 \par Horn, R. R., & Williams, A. M. (2004). Observational learning: Is it time we took another look? In A. M. Williams & N. J. Hodges (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}{\fs16  (pp. 175\'d0206). London: Routledge.}
{\fs16 \par Horn, R. R., Williams, A. M., & Scott, M. A. (2002). Learning from demonstrations: The role of visual search during \u173 ?
observational learning from video and point-light models. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 20,}{\fs16
 253\'d0269.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Howells, N. R., Gill, H. S., Carr, A. J., Price, A. J., & Rees, J. L.}{\fs16  \line (2008). Transferring simulated arthroscopic skills to the operating theatre: A randomized blinded study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 90, }{\fs16 494\'d0499.}{\fs16 \par Hreljac, A. (1993). Preferred and energetically optimal gait transition speeds in human locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Medicine and \u173 ?Science in Sports and Exercise, 25,}{\fs16  1158\'d01162.}{\fs16 \par Hu, Y., Osu, R., Okada, M., Goodale, M. A., & Kawato, M. (2005). A model of coupling between grip aperture and hand transport during human prehension. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 167,}{\fs16  301\'d0304.\par }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 Huang, H., Wang, J., Seger, C., Lu, M., Deng, F., Wu, }
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \line }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 X., }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  Huang, R. (2018). Long-term intensive gymnastic training induced changes in intra- and inter-network functional connectivity: }
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 An}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  independent component analysis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd1\expndtw3 Brain Structure and Function, 223, }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd1\expndtw3 \line }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 131\'d0144.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Huang, H., Wolf, S. L., & He, J. P. (2006). Recent developments in biofeedback for neuromotor rehabilitation. }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 3,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0
 11. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 (Open Access journal; no page numbers for citation purposes)}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \par }
{\fs16 Hubbard, A. W., & Seng, C. N. (1954). Visual movements of batters. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 25,}
{\fs16  42\'d057.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Huber, J. E., Stathopoulos, E. T., & Sussman, J. E. (2004). The control of aerodynamics, acoustics, and perceptual charac}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 teristics during speech production. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 116,}
{\fs16  2345}{\fs16 \'d02353 (Part 1).\par Husak, W. S., Cohen, M. J., & Schandler, S. L. (1991). Activation peaking during the acquisition of a motor task under high and low contextual-interference conditions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 72,}{\fs16  1075}{\fs16 \'d01088.\par Hutton, S. B., & Weekes, B. S. (2007). Low frequency rTMS over posterior parietal cortex impairs smooth pursuit eye tracking. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 183, }{\fs16 195\'d0200.\par Iacoboni, M., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2007). Mirror neuron system: Basic findings and clinical applications. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annals of \line Neurology, 62,}{\fs16  213\'d0218.\par Iacoboni, M., & Zaidel, E. (2004). Interhemispheric visuo-\u173 ?
motor integration in humans: The role of the superior parietal cortex. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychologia, 42}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  419\'d0425.\par Ille, A., & Cadopi, M. (1999). Memory for movement \u173 ?sequences in gymnastics: Effects of age and skill level. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 31,}{\fs16  290\'d0300.\par Immink, M. A., & Wright, D L. (2001). Motor programming during practice conditions high and low in contextual interference. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology:}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Perception and Performance, 27,}
{\fs16  423\'d0437.\par }{\fs16 Intiso, D., Santilli, V., Grasso, M. G., Rossi, R., & Caruso, I. }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 (1994). Rehabilitation of walking with electromyographic biofeedback in drop-foot after stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Stroke, 25,}{\fs16  1189\'d01192.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Ioffe, M. E., Ustinova, K. I., Chernikova, L. A., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 & Kulikov, M.\u8239 ?A. (2006). Supervised learning of postural tasks in patients with poststroke hemiparesis, Parkinson\rquote s disease or cerebellar ataxia. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Experimental Brain Research, 168,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  384\'d0394.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par Ivanenko, Y. P., Dominici, N., Cappellini, G., Dan, B., Cheron, G., & Lacquaniti, F. (2004). Development of pendulum mechanism and kinematic coordination from the first unsupported steps in toddlers.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Journal of Experimental Biology, 207,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  3797\'d03810.\par }{\fs16 Ivens, C. J., & Marteniuk, R. G. (1997). Increased sensitivity to changes in visual feedback with practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 29,}{\fs16  326\'d0338.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ivry, R. B., & Hazeltine, R. E. (1995). Perception and production of temporal intervals across a range of duration: Evidence for a common timing mechanism. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
 3\'d018.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }{\fs16 Jackson, N. B. (1999). When the brain\rquote s mailbox is full. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
New York Times,}{\fs16  July 27, 1999, p. F6. }{\fs16 \par Jackson, R. C. (2003). Pre-performance routine consistency: Temporal analysis of goal kicking in the Rugby Union World Cup. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 21,}{\fs16  803\'d0814.\par Jackson, R. C., & Morgan, P. (2007). Advance visual information, awareness, and anticipation skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 39, }{\fs16 341\'d0351.}{\fs16 \par Jackson, S. R., Newport, R., & Shaw, A. (2002). Monocular \u173 ?
vision leads to a dissociation between grip force and grip aperture scaling during reach-to-grasp movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Current Biology, 12,}{\fs16  237\'d0240.}{\fs16 \par Jacobson, E. (1931). Electrical measurement of neuromuscular states during mental activities: VI. A note on mental activities concerning an amputated limb. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Physiology, 43,}{\fs16  122\'d0125.}{\fs16 \par Jaegers, S. M. H. J., Peterson, R. F., Dantuma, R., Hillen, B., Geuze, R., & Schellekens, J. (1989). Kinesiologic aspects of motor learning in dart throwing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 16,}{\fs16  161\'d0171.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0
Jaffe, D. L., Brown, D. A., Pierson-Carey, C. D., Buckley, E. L., & Lew, H. L. (2004). Stepping over obstacles to improve walking in individuals with poststroke hemiplegia. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Rehabilitation Research & Development, 41,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  283\'d0292.\par }
{\fs16 Jakobson, L. S., & Goodale, M. A. (1991). Factors influencing higher-order movement planning: A kinematic analysis of human prehension. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 86,}{\fs16  199\'d0208.\par }{\fs16 Jambor, E. A., & Weekes, E. M. (1995, February). Videotape feedback: Make it more effective. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance, 66,}{\fs16  48\'d050.\par James, W. (1890). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Principles of psychology }{\fs16 (Vol. 2).}{\fs16  New York, NY: Holt.\par }{\fs16 J}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'8a}{\fs16 ncke, L., Koeneke, S., Hoppe, A., Rominger, C., & H}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8a}{\fs16 nggi, J. (2009). The architecture of the golfer\rquote s brain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS One, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 4}{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 (3), e4785}
{\fs16 .}{\fs16 \par Janelle, C. M., Barba, D. A., Frehlich, S. G., Tennant, L. K., & Cauraugh, J. H. (1997). Maximizing performance feedback effectiveness through videotape replay and a self-controlled learning environment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  269\'d0279.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Janelle, C. M., Champenoy, J. D., Coombes, S. A., & \u173 ?Mousseau, M. B. (2003). Mechanisms of attentional cueing during \u173 ?
observational learning to facilitate motor skill acquisition. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Sports Sciences, 21,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  825\'d0838.\par }{\fs16 Janelle, C. M., Kim, J., & Singer, R. N. (1995). Subject-\u173 ?controlled performance feedback and learning of a closed motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81,}{\fs16  627\'d0634.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Jantzen, K. J., Steinberg, F. L., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 & Kelso, J. A. S. (2005). \u173 ?Functional MRI reveals the existence of modality and \u173 ?
coordination-dependent timing networks. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 25,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  1031\'d01042.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Jaroslawska, A., Gathercole, S. E., & Holmes, J. (2018). Following instructions in a dual-task paradigm: Evidence }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 for a temporary motor store in working memory. }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 (11), 2439}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 2449.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }{\fs16 J}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 eannerod, M. (1981). Intersegmental coordination during reaching at natural visual objects. In J. Long & A. \u173 ?}
{\fs16 Baddeley (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Attention and performance IX}{\fs16  (pp. 153\'d0168). \u173 ?Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.}
{\fs16 \par Jeannerod, M. (1984). The timing of natural prehension. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 16,}
{\fs16  235\'d0254.\par Jeannerod, M. (2001). Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for motor cognition. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
NeuroImage, 14,}{\fs16  103\'d0109.\par }{\fs16 Jeannerod, M., & Marteniuk, R. G. (1992). Functional characteristics of prehesion: From data to artificial neural networks. In L. Proteau & D. Elliott (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Vision and motor control}{\fs16  (pp. 197\'d0232). Amsterdam: North-Holland.}{\fs16 \par Jeka, J. J., Ribiero, P., Oie, K., & Lackner, J. R. (1998). The structure of somatosensory information for human postural control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 2,}{\fs16  13\'d033.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Jeraj, D., & Heinen, T. (2015). The simulation of coaches\rquote  manual guidance techniques during the performance of a gymnastic skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science of Gymnastics Journal, 7,}{\fs16  27}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 36.}{\fs16 \par Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological motion and a model for its analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception and Psychophysics, 14,}{\fs16  201\'d0211.}{\fs16 \par Johnson, S. H. (1998). Cerebral organization of motor imagery: Contralateral control of grip selection in mentally represented prehension. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 9,}{\fs16  219\'d0222.}{\fs16 \par Jongsma, D. M., Elliott, D., & Lee, T. D. (1987). Experience and set in the running sprint start. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 64,}{\fs16  547\'d0550.}{\fs16 \par Kahneman, D. (1973). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Attention and effort.}{\fs16  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.\par Kahneman, D. (2011). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Thinking,}
{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 fast and slow. }{\fs16 New York, NY: \line Farrar, Straus and Giroux.\par }{\fs16 Kalun, P., Wagner, N., Yan, J., Nousiainen, M. T., & Sonnadara, R. R. (2018). Surgical simulation training in orthopedics: Current insights. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Advances in Medical Education and Practice, 9,}{\fs16  125\'d0131.}{\fs16 \par Kamon, E., }{\fs16
& Gormley, J. (1968). Muscular activity pattern for skilled performance and during learning of a horizontal bar exercise. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Ergonomics, 11,}{\fs16  345\'d0357.\par Kao, J. C., }{\fs16 & Ringenbach, S. D. R. (2004). Variability in head movements during gait transitions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 99,}{\fs16  1217\'d01229.\par }{\fs16 Kardas, M., & O\rquote Brien, E. (2018). Easier seen than done: Merely watching others perform can foster an illusion of skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 29}{\fs16 (4), 521}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 536.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Kato, T., & Fukuda, T. (2002). Visual search strategies of }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 baseball batters: Eye movements during the preparatory phase of batting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 94,}{\fs16  }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 380\'d0386.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Katsumata, H. (2008). A functional modulation for timing a movement: The coordinative structure in baseball hitting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Human Movement Science, 26,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  27\'d047.\par Kazennikov, O., Solopova, I., Talis, V., & Ioffe, M. (2008). Anticipatory postural adjustment: The role of motor cortex in natural and learned bimanual unloading. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Experimental Brain Research, 186,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  215\'d0223.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Kearney, P. E., & Judge, P. (2017). Successful transfer of a motor learning strategy to a novel sport. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 124,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  1009}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 1021.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
\par }{\fs16 Keele, S. W. (1968). Movement control in skilled motor performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Bulletin, 70,}
{\fs16  387\'d0403.}{\fs16 \par Keele, S. W., & Posner, M. I. (1968). Processing of visual \u173 ?feedback in rapid movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental \line Psychology, 77,}{\fs16  153\'d0158.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Keetch, K. M., Schmidt, R. A., Lee, T. D., & Young, D. E. (2005). Especial skills: Their emergence with massive amounts of practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31,}{\fs16  970\'d0978.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Kelso, J. A. S. (1984). Phase transitions and critical behavior \line in human bimanual coordination. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
American Journal of \line Physiology: Regulatory, Integrative, and Comparative \line Physiology, 15,}{\fs16  R1000\'d0R1004.}{\fs16
\par }{\fs16 Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Dynamic patterns: The self-organization of brain and behavior.}
{\fs16  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.\par }{\fs16 Kelso, J. A. S. (1997). Relative timing in brain and behavior: Some observations about the generalized motor program and self-organized coordination dynamics. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 16,}{\fs16  453\'d0460.\par }{\fs16 Kelso, J. A. S., Holt, K. G., }{\fs16
& Flatt, A. E. (1980). The role of proprioception in the perception and control of human movement: Toward a theoretical reassessment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception and Psychophysics, 28,}{\fs16  45\'d052.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Kelso, J. A. S., & Scholz, J. P. (1985). Cooperative phenomena in biological motion. In H. Haken (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Complex \u173 ?systems: Operational approaches in neurobiology, physical systems, and computers}{\fs16  (pp. 124\'d0149). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.}
{\fs16 \par Kelso, J. A. S., Southard, D. L., & Goodman, D. (1979). On the coordination of two-handed movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 5,}{\fs16  229\'d0238.}{\fs16 \par Kelso, J. A. S., & Zanone, P. G. (2002). Coordination dynamics of learning and transfer across different effector systems. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28,}{\fs16  776\'d0797.}
{\fs16 \par Kernodle, M. W., & Carlton, L. G. (1992). Information feedback and the learning of multiple-degree-of-freedom activities. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 24,}{\fs16  187\'d0196.}{\fs16 \par Khan, M. A., Franks, I. M., & Goodman, D. (1998). The effect of practice on the control of rapid aiming movements: Evidence for an interdependency between programming and feedback processing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51A,}{\fs16  425\'d0444.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Kim, J., Lee, H. M., Kim, W. J., Park, H. J., Kim, S. W., Moon, D. H., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'c9}{\fs16  Tennant, L. K. (2008). Neural correlates of pre-performance routines in expert and novice archers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience Letters, 445,}{\fs16  236\'d0241.\par Kim, W., Chang, Y., Kim, J., Seo, J., Ryu, K., Lee, E., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'c9}{\fs16  Janelle, C. M. (2014). An fMRI study of differences in brain activity among elite, expert, and novice archers at the moment of optimal aiming. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 27,}{\fs16  173\'d0182.\par Klapp, S. T., Maslovat, D., & Jagacinski, R. J. (2018). The bottleneck of the psychological refractory period effect involves timing of response initiation rather than response selection. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.}{\fs16  https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-018-1498-6\par Klepper, S. E., Krasinski, D. C., Gilb, M. C., & Khalil, N. (2017). Comparing unimanual and bimanual training in upper extremity function in children with unilateral cerebral palsy. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Pediatric Physical Therapy, 29,}{\fs16  288\'d0306.}{\fs16 \par Kline, J. E., Huang, H. J., Snyder, K. L., & Ferris, D. P. (2015). Isolating gait-related movement artifacts in electroencephalography during human walking. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neural Engineering, 12}{\fs16 . doi: c10.1088/1741-2560/12/4/046022.\par }{\fs16 Knapp, C. G., & Dixon, W. R. (1952). Learning to juggle: II. }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 A study of whole and part methods. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly, 23,}{\fs16  398\'d0401.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Kobelt, M., Wirth, B., & Schuster-Amft, C. (2018). Muscle activation during grasping with and }{\fs16 without }
{\fs16 motor imagery in healthy volunteers and patients after stroke or with Parkinson}{\fs16 \rquote }{\fs16 s disease. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Frontiers in Psychology, 9}{\fs16 , }{\fs16 597. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.0597.}{\fs16 \par Koedijker, J. M., Oudejans, R. R. D., & Beek, P. J. (2010). Interference effects in learning similar sequences of discrete movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 42}{\fs16 (4), 209\'d0222.\par Konczak, J. (1994). Effects of optic flow on the kinematics of human gait: A comparison of young and older adults. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  225\'d0236.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Kostrubiec, V., Zanone, P. G., Fuchs, A., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2012). Beyond the blank slate: Routes to learning new coordination patterns depend on the intrinsic dynamics of the learner\'d1experimental evidence and theoretical model. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 , 3}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
(6), 222. }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00222}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 .}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
Kourtis, D., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2012). EEG correlates of Fitts\rquote s law during preparation for action. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Research, 76,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  514\'d0524.\par Kovacs, A. J., Buchanan, J. J., & Shea, C. H. (2010). Impossible is nothing: 5:3 and 4:3 multi-frequency bimanual coordination. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 201,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  249\'d0259.\par Koziol, L. F., Budding, D. E., & Chidekel, D. (2012). From movement to thought: Executive function, embodied cognition, and the cerebellum. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebellum, 11, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 505\'d0525.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Kredel, R., Vater, C., Klostermann, A., & Hossner, E-J. (2017). Eye-tracking technology and the dynamics of natural gaze behavior in sports: A systematic review of 40 years of research. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology, 8,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  1845. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01845.\par Kretch, K. S., & Adolph, K. E. (2013). Cliff or step? Posture-specific learning at the edge of a drop-off. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Child Development, 84,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  226}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
240.\par Kung, S.M., Fink, P.W., Legg, S.J., Ali, A., & Shultz, S.P. (2018). What factors determine the preferred gait transition speed in humans? A review of the triggering mechanisms. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 57,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  1}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
12. \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 K}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'9f}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 nzell, S., & Lukas, S. (2011). Facilitation effects of a preparatory skateboard training on the learning of snowboarding. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Kinesiology, 43,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  56\'d063.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Kurtz, S., & Lee, T. D. (2003). Part and whole perceptual-}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \line }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3\u173 ?motor practice of a polyrhythm. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3
Neuroscience Letters, 338,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  205\'d0208.\par }{\fs16 Kurz, M. J., Stergiou, N., Buzzi, U. H., & Georgoulis, A. D. (2005). The effect of anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction on lower extremity relative phase dynamics during walking and running. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 13,}{\fs16  107}{\fs16 \'d0115.\par }{\fs16 Kwakkel, G., & Wagenaar, R. C. (2002). Effect of duration of upper- and lower-extremity rehabilitation sessions and walking speed on recovery of interlimb coordination in hemiplegic gait. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 82}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  432\'d0448.\par Laabs, G. J. (1973). Retention characteristics of different reproduction cues in motor short-term memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology, 100,}{\fs16  168\'d0177.\par }{\fs16 Lafleur, M. F., Jackson, P. L., Malouin, F., Richards, C. L., Evans, A. C., & Doyon, J. (2002). Motor learning produces parallel dynamic functional changes during the execution and imagination of sequential foot movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neuro-Image, 16,}{\fs16  142\'d0157.\par }{\fs16 Lai, Q., & Shea, C. H. (1999). Bandwidth knowledge of results enhances generalized motor program learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}{\fs16  79\'d083.\par Lai, Q., Shea, C. H., Bruechert, L., }
{\fs16 & Little, M. (2002). Auditory model enhances relative-time learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?
Motor Behavior, 34,}{\fs16  299\'d0307.\par Landers, D. M., Han, M. W., Salazar, W., Petruzello, S. J., \u173 ?Kubitz, K. A., }{\fs16
& Gannon, T. L. (1994). }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Effects on learning on electroencephalographic and electrocardiographic }{\fs16
patterns in novice archers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 25,}{\fs16  313\'d0330.}
{\fs16 \par Landers, D. M., Petruzello, S. J., Salazar, W., Kubitz, K. A., Gannon, T. L., & Han, M. (1991). The influence of electrocortical biofeedback on performance in pre-elite archers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Medicine in Science, Sports, and Exercise, 23,}{\fs16  123\'d0129.}{\fs16 \par Landin, D. (1994). The role of verbal cues in skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quest, 46,}{\fs16  299\'d0313.}{\fs16 \par Landin, D. L., & Hebert, E. P. (1997). A comparison of three practice schedules along the contextual interference continuum. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  357\'d0361.}{\fs16 \par Landin, D. L., & Hebert, E. P. (1999). The influence of self-talk on the performance of skilled female tennis players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  263\'d0282.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Lange, G., Waked, W., Kirshblum, S., & DeLuca, J. (2000). \u173 ?Organizational strategy influence on visual memory \u173 ?
performance after stroke: Cortical/subcortical and left/right hemisphere contrasts. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 81,}
{\fs16  89\'d094.}{\fs16 \par Langley, D. J. (1995). Student cognition in the instructional setting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 15,}{\fs16  25\'d040.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Larish, D. D., & Stelmach, G. E. (1982). Preprogramming, \u173 ?
programming, and reprogramming of aimed hand movements as a function of age. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Motor Behavior, 14,}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  322\'d0340.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }{\fs16 Lashley, K. S. (1917). The accuracy of movement in the absence of excitation from the moving organ. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Physiology, 43,}{\fs16  169\'d0194.}{\fs16 \par Lashley, K. S. (1942). The problem of cerebral organization in vision. In J. Cattell (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Biological symposia, Vol. VII. \u173 ?Visual mechanisms}{\fs16  (pp. 112\'d0136). Lancaster, PA: Jacques Cattell Press.}
{\fs16 \par Lashley, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in behavior. In L. A. Jeffress (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Cerebral mechanisms in behavior}{\fs16  (pp. 112\'d0136). New York, NY: Wiley.\par }{\fs16 Latash, M. L. (1999). Mirror writing: Learning, transfer, and implications for internal inverse models. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 31,}{\fs16  107\'d0111.\par Latash, M.L. (2012). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Fundamentals of motor control.}{\fs16  San Diego, CA: Academic Press.\par Latash, M. L., & Jaric, S. (2002). Organization of drinking: Postural characteristics of arm-head coordination. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 34,}{\fs16  139\'d0150.\par Latash, M. L., & Turvey, M. T. (Eds.). (1996). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Dexterity and its development.}{\fs16  Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.\par Latt, M. D., Menz, H. B., Fung, V. S., & Lord, S. R. (2008). Walking speed, cadence, and step length are selected to optimize the stability of head and pelvis accelerations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 184,}{\fs16  201\'d0209.\par Laughlin, D. D., Fairbrother, J. T., Wrisberg, C. A., Alami, A., Fisher, L. A., & Huck, S. W. (2015). Self-control behaviors during the learning of a cascade juggling task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 41}{\fs16 , 9\'d019.\par Laugier, C., & Cadopi, M. (1996). Representational guidance of dance performance in adult novices: Effect of concrete vs. abstract movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 27,}{\fs16  91\'d0108.\par Laurent, M., }{\fs16 & Thomson, J. A. (1988). The role of visual information in control of a constrained locomotor task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 20,}{\fs16  17\'d038.\par Lay, B. S., Sparrow, W. A., Hughes, K. M., }
{\fs16 & O\rquote Dwyer, N. J. (2002). Practice effects on coordination and control, metabolic energy expenditure, and muscle activation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 21,}{\fs16  807\'d0830.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 LeBeau, J-C., Liu, S., S}
{\f4\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'87}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 enz-Moncaleano, C., Sanduvete-Chaves, S., Chac}{\f4\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-2
\'97}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 n-Moscoso, S., Becker, B. J., & Tenenbaum, G. (2016). Quiet eye and performance in sport: A meta-analysis. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 38, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 441}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 457.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Lee, T. D. (2011). }{\f2\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3
Motor control in everyday actions. }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Lee, A., Bhatt, T., Liu, X., Wang, Y., & Pai, Y-C. (2018). Can higher dosage training with treadmill slip-perturbation necessarily reduce risk of falls following overground slip? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Gait & Posture, 61,}{\fs16  387}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 392.\par }{\fs16 Lee, A. M., Keh, N. C., & Magill, R. A. (1993). Instructional effects of teacher feedback in physical education. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal \line of Teaching in Physical Education, 12,}{\fs16  228\'d0243.\par Lee, D. N. (2009). General tau theory: Evolution to date. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, 38}{\fs16 , 837\'d0858.\par Lee, D. N., Bootsma, R. J., Frost, B. J., Land, M., Regan, D., & \line Gray, R. (2009). Lee\rquote s 1976 paper. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, 38,}{\fs16  837\'d0858.\par }{\fs16 Lee, D. N. (1974). Visual information during locomotion. In R.\u8239 ?
B. MacLeod & H. Pick (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception: Essays in honor\u8239 ?of J. J. Gibson}{\fs16  (pp. 250}
{\fs16 \'d0267). Ithaca, NY: Cornell \u173 ?University Press.\par Lee, D. N., & Aronson, E. (1974). Visual proprioceptive control of standing in human infants. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception and \u173 ?Psychophysics, 15,}{\fs16  527}{\fs16 \'d0532.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Lee, D. N., Lishman, J. R., & Thomson, J. A. (1982). Regulation of gait in long jumping. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Experimen}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 tal \u173 ?Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
448}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0459.\par }{\fs16 Lee, M., Hinder, M. R., Gandevia, S. C., & Carroll, T. J. (2010)}{\fs16 .}{\fs16
 The ipsilateral motor cortex contributes to cross-limb transfer of performance gains after ballistic motor practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Physiology, 588,}{\fs16  201}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 212.\par }{\fs16 Lee, T. D. (1988). Testing for motor learning: A focus on \u173 ?
transfer-appropriate processing. In O. G. Meijer & K. Roth (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Complex motor behaviour: }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \ldblquote The\rdblquote  motor-action controversy}{\fs16  (pp. 210\'d0215). Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par }
{\fs16 Lee, T. D. (2011). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor control in everyday actions.}{\fs16  Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.}
{\fs16 \par Lee, T. D. (2012). Contextual interference: Generalizability and limitations. In N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice }{\fs16 (2nd ed., pp. 79\'d093). New York, NY: Routledge.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Lee, T. D., Chamberlin, C. J., & Hodges, N. J. (2001). Arranging}{\fs16  practice conditions and designing instruction. In }
{\fs16 R. N. Singer}{\fs16 , H. A. Hausenblaus, & C. M. Janelle (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook of sport psychology}
{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp. 115\'d0443). New\u8239 ?York, NY: Wiley.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lee, T. D., Eliasz, K. L., Gonzalez, D., Alguire, K., Ding, K., & Dhaliwal, C. (2016). On the role of error in motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 48}{\fs16 (2), 99}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 115, doi: 10.1080/00222895.2015.1046545.}
{\fs16 \par Lee, T. D., }{\fs16 & Genovese, E. D. (1988). Distribution of practice in motor skill acquisition: Learning and performance \u173 ?
effects reconsidered. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 59,}{\fs16  59\'d067.\par Lee, T. D., }
{\fs16 & Genovese, E. D. (1989). Distribution of practice in motor skill acquisition: Different effects for discrete and continuous tasks. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 59,}{\fs16  277\'d0287.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Lee, T. D., & Hirota, T. T. (1980). Encoding specificity principle}{\fs16  in motor short-term memory for movement extent. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 12,}{\fs16  63\'d067.}{\fs16 \par Lee, T. D., & Magill, R. A. (1983). Activity during the post-KR interval: Effects upon performance or learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 54,}{\fs16  \line 340\'d0345.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lee, T. D., & Magill, R. A. (1985). Can forgetting facilitate skill acquisition? In D. Goodman, R. B. Wilberg, & I. M. Franks (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Differing perspectives in motor learning, memory and control}{\fs16  (pp. 3}{\fs16 \'d022). Amsterdam: North-\u173 ?
Holland.\par }{\fs16 Lee, T. D., Swinnen, S. P., & Serrien, D. J. (1994). Cognitive \u173 ?effort and motor learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Quest, 46,}{\fs16  328\'d0344.}{\fs16 \par Lee, T. D., Swinnen, S. P., & Verschueren, S. (1995). Relative phase alterations during bimanual skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 27,}{\fs16  263\'d0274.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lee, T. D., White, M. A., & Carnahan, H. (1990). On the role of knowledge of results in motor learning: Exploring the guidance hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 22,}{\fs16  191\'d0208.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lee, T. G., Acu}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'96}{\fs16 a, D. E., Kording, K. P., Grafton, S. T. (2018). Limiting motor skill knowledge via incidental training protects against choking under pressure. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.}{\fs16  https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-018-1486-x \par Lefumat, H., Renault, A. G., }
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'af}{\fs16 rstavik, K., Cole, J. D., Sarlegna, F. R. (2018). Proprioceptive loss and the perception, control and learning or arm movements in humans: evidence from sensory neuropathy. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 236,}{\fs16  2137}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 2155.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lenoir, M., & Mazyn, L. (2005). The role of visual input \u173 ?
during rotation: The case of discus throwing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Biology of Sport, 22,}{\fs16  53\'d066.}{\fs16
\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Levin, M., Weiss, P. L., & Keshner, E. A. (2015). Emergence of virtual reality as a tool for upper limb rehabilitation: Incorporation of motor control and motor learning principles. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 95}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 , 415\'d0425.\par Li, L., & Caldwell, G. E. (1999). Coefficient of cross-correlation}
{\fs16  and the time domain correspondence. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 9,}
{\fs16  385}{\fs16 \'d0389.\par Li, Y., & Wright, D. L. (2000). An assessment of the attention demands during random and blocked-practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A,}{\fs16  591}{\fs16 \'d0606.\par Liao, C. M., & Masters, R. S. W. (2001). Analogy learning: A means to implicit motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 19,}{\fs16  307\'d0319.\par }{\fs16 Lidor, R., Tennant, K. L., & Singer, R. N. (1996). The generalizability effect of three learning strategies across motor task performances. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 27,}{\fs16  23}{\fs16 \'d036.\par }{\fs16 Lien, M. C., & Proctor, R. W. (2002). Stimulus-response \u173 ?
compatibility and psychological refractory period effects: }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Implications for response selection. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychonomic Bulletin }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 & Review, 9,}{\fs16  212\'d0238.\par }{\fs16 Lima, C. A., Ricci, N. A., Nogueira, E. C., & Perracini, M. R. (2018). The Berg Balance Scale as a clinical screening tool to predict fall risk in older adults: a systematic review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physiotherapy, 104}{\fs16 (4), 383}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 394.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Lin, C. H., Fisher, B. E., Winstein, C. J., Wu, A. D., & }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Gordon}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 , J. (2008). Contextual interference effect: \line Elaborative processing or forgetting-reconstruction? A post hoc analysis of transcranial magnetic stimulation-induced effects on motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Journal of Motor Behavior, 40,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  578\'d086.\par }{\fs16 Lin, C. H., Winstein, C. J., Fisher, B. E., & Wu, A. D. (2010). Neural correlates of the contextual interference effect in motor learning: A transcranial magnetic stimulation investigation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 42,}{\fs16  223\'d0232.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Lindahl, L. G. (1945). Movement analysis as an industrial training method. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Applied Psychology, 29,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  420\'d0436.\par }{\fs16 Linden, C. A., Uhley, J. E., Smith, D., }
{\fs16 & Bush, M. A. (1989). The effects of mental practice on walking balance in an \u173 ?elderly population. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Occupational Therapy Journal \line of Research, 9,}{\fs16  155\'d0169.\par }{\fs16 Lintern, G. (1991). An informational perspective on skill \u173 ?
transfer in human-machine systems. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Factors, 33,}{\fs16  251\'d0266.\par }{\fs16 Lintern, G., Roscoe, S. N., }
{\fs16 & Sivier, J. (1990). Display principles, control dynamics, and environmental factors in pilot training and transfer. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Factors, 32,}{\fs16  299\'d0317.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Lipovac, K., }{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u272 ?}{\fs16 eri}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u263 ?}
{\fs16 , M., Te}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u353 ?}{\fs16 i}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u263 ?}{\fs16 , M., Andri}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u263 ?}
{\fs16 , Z., & Mari}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\u263 ?}{\fs16 , B. (2017). Mobile phone use while driving - literary review. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Transportation Research Part F, 47,}{\fs16  132}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 142.  \par }{\fs16 Little, W. S., & McCullagh, P. M. (1989). Motivation orientation and modeled instruction strategies: The effects on form and accuracy. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 11,}{\fs16  41\'d053.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Liu, J., & Wrisberg, C. A. (1997). The effect of knowledge of results delay and the subjective estimation of movement form on the acquisition and retention of a motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  145\'d0151.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Liu, K. P. Y., Chan, C. C. H., Wong, R. S. M., Kwan, I. W. L., Yau, C. S. F., Li, L. S. W., & Lee, T. M. C. (2009). A randomized controlled trial of mental imagery augment generalization of learning in acute poststroke patients. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Stroke, 40,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  2222\'d02225.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Loeb, J. (1890). Untersuchungen uber die Orientirung im Fuhlraum der Hand und im Blickraum. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Pflueger Archives of\u8239 ?General Physiology, 46,}{\fs16  1\'d046.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Loffing, F., & Ca}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'96}{\fs16 al-Bruland, R. (2017). Anticipation in sport. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Opinion in Psychology, 16,}
{\fs16  6\'d011.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Logan, G. D. (1985). Skill and automaticity: Relations, implications, and future directions. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Canadian Journal of \u173 ?Psychology, 39,}{\fs16  367\'d0386.}{\fs16 \par Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of automatization. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 95,}{\fs16  492\'d0527.}{\fs16 \par Logan, G. D., Taylor, S. E., & Etherton, J. L. (1999). Attention and automaticity. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Research, 62}{\fs16 (2\'d03), 165\'d0181.}{\fs16 \par Lohse, K. R., Wadden, K., Boyd, L. A., & Hodges, N. J. (2014). Motor skill acquisition across short and long time scales: A meta-analysis of neuroimaging data. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuropsychologia, 59}{\fs16 , 130\'d0141.\par Loken, W. J., Thornton, A. E., Otto, R. L., & Long, C. J. (1995). Sustained attention after severe closed head injury. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuro\u173 ?psychology, 9,}{\fs16  592\'d0598.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Lopez-Molinar, J., Brenner, E., Louw, S., & Smeets, J. B. J. (2010). Catching a gently thrown ball. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 206,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  409}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
417.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Louis, M., Guillot, A., Maton, S., Doyon, J., & Collet, C. (2008). Effect of imagined movement speed on subsequent motor performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 40,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  117\'d0132.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }
{\fs16 Lovell, G., & Collins, D. (2002). Electroencephalographic \u173 ?differences between high and low mental imagery \u173 ?ability groups when learning a novel motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Human Movement Studies, 43,}{\fs16  269\'d0295.}{\fs16 \par Loze, G. M., Collins, D., & Holmes, P. S. (2001). Pre-shot EEG alpha-power reactivity during expert air-pistol shooting: A\u8239 ?
comparison of best and worst shots. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports \u173 ?Sciences, 19,}{\fs16  727\'d0733.}
{\fs16 \par Macefield, V. G. (2005). Physiological characteristics of low-threshold mechanoreceptors in joints, muscle and skin in \u173 ?
human subjects. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 32,}{\fs16  135\'d0144.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Macefield, V. G., & Knellwolf, T. P. (2018). Functional properties of human muscle spindles. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Neurophysiology, 120,}{\fs16  452}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 467.}{\fs16 \par Mack, M. G. (2001). Effects of time and movements in the preshot routine on free throw shooting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and \u173 ?Motor Skills, 93,}{\fs16  567\'d0573.\par }{\fs16 Mackenzie, A. K., & Harris, J. M. (2017). A link between attentional function, effective eye movements, and driving ability. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 43,}{\fs16  381}{\fs16 \'d0}
{\fs16 394.}{\fs16 \par Mackrous, I., & Proteau, L. (2007). Specificity of practice results from differences in movement planning strategies. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 183}{\fs16 , 181\'d0193.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Mackworth, N. H. (1956). Vigilance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Nature, 178,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  1375\'d01377.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Macnamara, B. N., Hambrick, D. Z., & Oswald, F. L. (2014). Deliberate practice and performance in music, games, sports, education, and professions: A meta-analysis. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 25}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 (8), 1608\'d01638.\par Magill, R. A. (1988). Activity during the post-knowledge \line of \u173 ?
results interval can benefit motor skill learning. In \line O. G. Meijer & K. Roth (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Complex motor behavior: \ldblquote The\rdblquote  motor-action controversy}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  (pp. 231}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \'d0246). \u173 ?Amsterdam: \u173 ?Elsevier.\par }{\fs16 Magill, R. A. (1998). Knowledge is more than we can talk about: Implicit learning in motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  104\'d0110.\par Magill, R. A., & Anderson, D. I. (2012). The roles and uses of augmented feedback in motor skill acquisition. In \line N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}{\fs16  (2nd ed, pp. 3\'d021). New York, NY: Routledge.\par }
{\fs16 Magill, R. A., Chamberlin, C. J., & Hall, K. G. (1991). Verbal knowledge of results as redundant information for learning an anticipation timing skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 10,}{\fs16  485\'d0507.}{\fs16 \par Magill, R. A., & Hall, K. G. (1990). A review of the contextual interference effect in motor skill acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 9,}{\fs16  241}{\fs16 \'d0289.\par Magill, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (1987). Verbal label effects on \u173 ?
response accuracy and organization for learning limb positioning movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 13,}
{\fs16  285}{\fs16 \'d0308.\par Magill, R. A., & Schoenfelder-Zohdi, B. (1996). A visual model and knowledge of performance as sources of information for learning a rhythmic gymnastics skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 27,}{\fs16  7}{\fs16 \'d022.\par }{\fs16 Magill, R. A., Waters, W. F., Bray, G. A., Volaufova, J., \line }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Smith, S. R., Lieberman, H. R., .\'ca.\'ca. Ryan, D. H. \line }{\fs16 (2003). Effect of tyrosine, phenteramine, caffeine, \line D-\u173 ?
amphetamine, and placebo on cognitive and motor \u173 ?performance deficits during sleep deprivation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Nutritional Neuroscience,}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 6,}{\fs16  237\'d0246.\par }{\fs16 Magill, R. A., & Wood, C. A. (1986). Knowledge of results \u173 ?
precision as a learning variable in motor skill acquisition. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 57,}
{\fs16  170\'d0173.\par }{\fs16 Mahoney, M. J., & Avener, A. (1977). Psychology of the elite athlete: An exploratory study. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Cognitive Therapy and \u173 ?Research, 1,}{\fs16  135\'d0141.}{\fs16 \par Malcolm, M. P., Massie, C., & Thaut, M. (2009). Rhythmic auditory-motor entrainment improves hemiparetic arm kinematics during reaching movements: A pilot study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 16,}{\fs16  69\'d079.\par Malouin, F., Belleville, S., Richards, C. L., Desrosiers, J., & Doyon, J. (2004). Working memory and mental practice outcomes after stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 85,}{\fs16  177\'d0183.\par Malouin, F., Richards, C., Duran, A., & Doyon, J. (2009). Added value of mental practice combined with a small amount of physical practice on the relearning of rising and sitting post-stroke: A pilot study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy, 33,}{\fs16  195\'d0202.\par }{\fs16 Man}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'8e}{\fs16 , A., & Donchin, E. (1989). The Space Fortress game. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 71,}{\fs16
 17\'d022.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Marotta, J. J., Kruyer, A., & Goodale, M. A. (1998). The role of head movement in the control of manual prehension. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 120,}{\fs16  134\'d0138.}{\fs16 \par Mars, F., Archambault, P. S., & Feldman, A. (2003). Vestibular contribution to combined arm and trunk motion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 150,}{\fs16  515}{\fs16 \'d0519.\par Marteniuk, R. G. (1986). Information processes in movement learning: Capacity and structural interference. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 5,}{\fs16  249\'d0259.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Marteniuk, R. G., & Romanow, S. K. E. (1983). Human movement organization and learning as revealed by variability of movement, use of kinematic information and Fourier \u173 ?
analysis. In R. A. Magill (Ed.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Memory and control of \u173 ?action}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  (pp. 167}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \'d0197). Amsterdam: North-Holland.\par }{\fs16 Martin, K. A., Moritz, S. A., & Hall, C. R. (1999). Imagery use in sport: A literature review and applied model. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Sport Psychologist, 13,}{\fs16  245}{\fs16 \'d0268.\par }{\fs16 Martini, M. (2016). Real, rubber or virtual: The vision of }
{\fs16 \ldblquote }{\fs16 one}{\fs16 \rquote }{\fs16 s own}{\fs16 \rdblquote }{\fs16  body as a means for pain modulation: A narrative review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Consciousness and Cognition, 43,}{\fs16  143}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 151.}{\fs16 \par Maslovat, D., Brunke, K. M., Chua, R., & Franks, I. M. (2009). Feedback effects on learning a novel bimanual coordination pattern: Support for the guidance hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 41, }{\fs16 45\'d054.\par Masser, L. S. (1993). Critical cues help first-grade students\rquote  achievement in handstands and forward rolls. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 12,}{\fs16  301}{\fs16 \'d0312.\par Masters, R. S. W., & Maxwell, J. (2008). The theory of reinvestment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 1,}{\fs16  160\'d0183.\par Masters, R. S. W., & Poolton, J. M. (2012). Advances in implicit motor learning. In N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp. 59\'d075). New York, NY: Routledge.\par Mathiowetz, V., & Wade, M. G. (1995). Task constraints and \u173 ?
functional motor performance of individuals with and \u173 ?without multiple sclerosis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Ecological Psychology, 7,}
{\fs16  99\'d0123.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Mathy, F., & Feldman, J. (2012). What\rquote s magic about magic numbers? Chunking and data compression in short-term memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognition, 122}{\fs16 (3),}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  346\'d0362.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Matthis, J. S., Yates, J. L., & Mayhoe, M. M. (2018). Gaze and the control of foot placement when walking in natural terrain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Biology, 28,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  1224}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
1233.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Mazyn, L. I. N., Lenoir, M., Montagne, G., }{\fs16 & Savelsbergh, G. J. P. (2004). The contribution of stereo vision to \u173 ?
one-handed catching. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 157,}{\fs16  383\'d0390.\par McAvinue, L. P., & Robertson, I. H. (2008). Measuring motor imagery ability: A review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 20,}{\fs16  232\'d0251.\par McCloy, C. H. (1934). The measurement of general motor \u173 ?
capacity and general motor ability. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 5\'ca}{\fs16 (Supplement), 46\'d061.\par McCullagh, P., Law, B., & Ste-Marie, D. (2012). Modeling and performance. In S. Murphy (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Oxford handbook of sport and performance psychology}{\fs16  (pp. 250\'d0272). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.\par McCullagh, P., }
{\fs16 & Meyer, K. N. (1997). Learning versus correct models: Influence of model type on the learning of a free-weight squat lift. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  56\'d061.\par McCullagh, P., Stiehl, J., }
{\fs16 & Weiss, M. R. (1990). Developmental modeling effects on the quantitative and qualitative \u173 ?aspects of motor performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for \u173 ?Exercise and Sport, 61,}{\fs16  344\'d0350.\par McCullagh, P., }
{\fs16 & Weiss, M. R. (2001). Modeling: Considerations for motor skill performance and psychological \u173 ?responses. In R. N. Singer, H. A. Hausenblaus, & C. M. Janelle (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook of sport psychology}{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp.\u8239 ?205\'d0238). New York, NY: Wiley.}{\fs16
\par McDonald, P. V., Oliver, S. K., & Newell, K. M. (1995). \line Per\u173 ?ceptual-motor exploration as a function of }{\fs16 biomechanical}
{\fs16  and task constraints. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Acta Psychologica, \line 88,}{\fs16  127}{\fs16 \'d0165.\par McIntosh, G. C., Brown, S. H., Rice, R. R., & Thaut, M. H. \line (1997). Rhythmic auditory-motor facilitation of gait \u173 ?
patterns in patients with Parkinson\rquote s disease. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 62,}
{\fs16  22\'d026.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 McLeod, P., Driver, J., Dienes, Z., & Crisp, J. (1991). Filtering by}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3\u8239 ?
movement in visual search. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Experimental \u173 ?Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 17,}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  55\'d064.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 McLeod, P., Reed, N., & Dienes, Z. (2001). Toward a unified fielder theory: What we do not yet know about how people run to catch a ball. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
 1347\'d01355.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }{\fs16 McNevin, N., Magill, R. A., & Buekers, M. J. (1994). The \u173 ?effects of erroneous knowledge of results on transfer of \u173 ?
anticipation timing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  324\'d0329.\par McNevin, N. H., Shea, C. H., & Wulf, G. (2003). Increasing the distance of an external focus of attention enhances learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Research, 67,}{\fs16  22\'d029.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 McPherson, S. L., & Thomas, J. R. (1989). Relation of \u173 ?
knowledge and performance in boy\rquote s tennis: Age and expertise. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 48,}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  190\'d0211.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }{\fs16 McPherson, S. L., & Vickers, J. N. (2004). Cognitive control in motor expertise. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport and \u173 ?Exercise Psychology, 2,}{\fs16  274\'d0300.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Mechsner, F., Kerzel, D., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2001). Perceptual basis of bimanual coordination. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Nature, 414,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  69\'d073.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Medina, J. M., Wong, W., D}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'92}{\fs16 az, J. A., & Colonius, H. \line (2015). Advances in modern mental chronometry. \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9}{\fs16 , 256. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00256.\par Meeuwsen, H., & Magill, R. A. (1987). The role of vision in gait control during gymnastics vaulting. In T. B. Hoshizaki, J. Salmela, & B. Petiot (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Diagnostics, \u173 ?treatment, and analysis of gymnastic talent}{\fs16  (pp. 137}{\fs16 \'d0155). \u173 ?
Montreal, \u173 ?Quebec, Canada: Sport\u8239 ?Psyche Editions.\par Mehta, J. P., Verber, M. D., Wieser, J. A., Schmit, B. D., & Schinder-Ivens, S. M. (2012). The effect of movement rate and complexity on functional magnetic resonance signal change during pedaling. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 16}{\fs16 (2), 158\'d0175.\par Melnick, M. J. (1971). Effects of overlearning on the retention of a gross motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 42,}{\fs16  60}{\fs16 \'d069.\par Merbah, S., & Meulemans, T. (2011). Learning a motor skill: Effects of blocked versus random practice a review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychologica Belgica, 51,}{\fs16  15\'d048.\par Mercer, V. S., & Sahrmann, S. A. (1999). Postural synergies \u173 ?
associated with a stepping task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 79,}{\fs16  1142\'d01152.\par Merians, A. S., Jack, D., Boian, R., Tremaine, M., Burdea, G.\u8239 ?
C., Adamovich, S. V., .\'ca.\'ca. Poizner, H. (2002). }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2\u173 ?Virtual reality-augmented rehabilitation for patients following}
{\fs16  stroke. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 82,}{\fs16  898\'d0915.\par }{\fs16 Messier, J., Adamovich, S., Berkinblit, M., Tunik, E., }
{\fs16 & Poizner, H. (2003). Influence of movement speed on \u173 ?accuracy and coordination of reaching movements to memorized targets in three-dimensional space in a deafferented subject. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 150,}{\fs16  399\'d0416.\par }{\fs16 Meyer, D. E., Abrams, R. A., Kornblum, S., Wright, C. E., }
{\fs16 & Smith, J. E. K. (1988). Optimality in human motor \u173 ?performance: Ideal control of rapid aimed movements. \u173 ?}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Review, 95,}{\fs16  340\'d0370.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Meyer, D. E., Osman, A. M., Irwin, D. E., & Yantis, S. (1988). Modern mental chronometry. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Biological Psychology, 26, }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 3\'d067}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 .\par }
{\fs16 Meyer, D. E., Smith, J. E. K., Kornblum, S., Abrams, R. A., & Wright, C. E. (1990). Speed-accuracy trade-offs in aimed movements: Toward a theory of rapid voluntary action. \line In M. Jeannerod (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Attention and performance XIII}{\fs16  \line (pp. 173\'d0226). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.}{\fs16
\par Meyer, P. F., Oddsson, L. I. E., & DeLuca, C. J. (2004). The role of plantar cutaneous sensation in unperturbed stance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 156,}{\fs16  505\'d0512.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Miall, R. C., & Jenkinson, E. W. (2005). Functional imaging of changes in cerebellar activity related to learning during a novel eye-hand tracking task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 166,}{\fs16  170\'d0183.\par }{\fs16 Miall, R. C., Kitchen, N. M., Nam, S-H., Lefumat, H., Renault, A. G., }
{\f4\fs16\b0\i0 \'af}{\fs16 rstavik, K., Cole, J. D., Sarlegna, F. R. (2018). Proprioceptive loss and the perception, control and learning or arm movements in humans: evidence from sensory neuropathy. }
{\f2\fs16\b0\i Experimental Brain Research, 236,}{\fs16  2137}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 2155.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Mikula, L., Sahnoun, S., Pisella, L., Blohm, G., & Khan, A. Z. (2018). Vibrotactile information improves proprioceptive reaching target localization. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 One}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 , 13}{\fs16 (7)}
{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  e0199627. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0199627\par }{\fs16 Miles, H. C., Pop, S. R., Watt, S. J., Lawrence, G. P., & John, N. W. (2012). A review of virtual environments for training in ball sports. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Computers & Graphics, 36,}{\fs16  714\'d0726.\par }{\fs16 Miller, E. W., Quinn, M. E., & Seddon, P. G. (2002). Body weight support treadmill training and overground ambulation training for two patients with chronic disability \u173 ?
secondary to stroke. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 82,}{\fs16  53\'d061.}{\fs16 \par Miller, G. (2005). Reflecting on another\rquote s mind. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science, \line 308,}{\fs16  945}{\fs16 \'d0947.\par Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven plus or minus }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.}{\fs16  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Review, 63,}{\fs16  81}{\fs16 \'d097.\par }{\fs16 Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Plans and the structure of behavior.}{\fs16  New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Millslagle, D. G. (2002). Recognition accuracy by experienced men and women players of basketball. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and \u173 ?Motor Skills, 95,}{\fs16  163\'d0172.\par Milner, A. D., Ganel, T., & Goodale, M. A. (2012). Does grasping in patient D.F. depend on vision? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16}{\fs16 (5), 256\'d0257.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Mirelman, A., Maidan, I., Herman, T., Deutsch, J. E., Giladi, N., & Hausdorff, J. M. (2011). Virtual reality for gait training: Can it induce motor learning to enhance complex walking and reduce fall risk in patients with Parkinson\rquote s disease? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3
66A}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 , 234\'d0240.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Mohagheghi, A. A., Moraes, R., & Patla, A. E. (2004). The \u173 ?
effects of distant and on-line visual information on the control of the approach phase and step over an obstacle during locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Experimental Brain Research, 155,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  459\'d0468.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }
{\fs16 Molinari, M., Leggio, M.}{\fs16  G., & Thaut, M. H. (2007). The }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 cerebellum and neural networks for rhythmic sensorimotor synchronization in the human brain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Cerebellum, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line 6,}{\fs16  18\'d023.}{\fs16 \par Molnar-Szakacs, I., Iacoboni, M., Koski, L., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2005). Functional segregation within pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus: Evidence from fMRI studies of imitation and action observation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebral Cortex, 15,}{\fs16  986}{\fs16 \'d0994.\par Montagne, G., Cornus, S., Glize, D., Quaine, F., & Laurent, M. \line (2000). A perception-action coupling type of control in long jumping. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 32,}{\fs16  37}{\fs16 \'d043.\par Moore, S. P., & Marteniuk, R. G. (1986). Kinematic and electromyographic changes that occur as a function of learning a time-constrained aiming task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 18,}{\fs16  397}{\fs16 \'d0426.\par Moradi, J., Movahedi, A., & Salehi, H. (2014). Specificity of learning a sport skill to the visual condition of acquisition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 46}{\fs16 , 17\'d023.\par Moran, A., Campbell, M., Holmes, P., & Macintyre, T. (2012). Mental imagery, action observation, and skill learning. In N. J. Hodges & A. M. Williams (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp. 94\'d0111). New York, NY: Routledge.\par Moreland, J., & Thomson, M. A. (1994). Efficacy of electromyographic biofeedback compared with conventional physical therapy for upper-extremity function in patients following stroke: A research overview and meta-analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 74,}{\fs16  534\'d0546.\par Moreland, J. D., Thomson, M. A., & Fuoco, A. R. (1998). Electromyographic biofeedback to improve lower extremity function after stroke: A meta-analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 79,}{\fs16  134\'d0140.\par Morris, M. E., Iansek, R., Matyas, T. A., & Summers, J. J. (1994). Ability to modulate walking cadence remains intact in Parkinson\rquote s disease. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 57,}{\fs16  1532\'d01534.\par }{\fs16 Moumdjian, L., Buhmann, J., Willems, I., Feys, P., & Leman, M. (2018). Entrainment and synchronization to auditory stimuli during walking in healthy and neurological populations: A methodological systematic review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 12}{\fs16  (263). doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00263.}{\fs16 \par }
{\fs16 Mount, J., Pierce, S. R., Parker, J., DiEgidio, R., Woessner, R., }{\fs16 \line & Spiegel, L. (2007). Trial and error versus errorless learning of functional skills in patients with acute stroke. \u173 ?}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroRehabilitation, 22,}{\fs16  123\'d0132.}{\fs16 \par Mourant, R. R., }{\fs16 & Rockwell, T. H. (1972). Strategies of visual search by novice and experienced drivers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Factors, 14,}{\fs16  325\'d0335.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Muller-Putz, G. R., Scherer, R., Pfurtscheller, G., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 & Rupp, R. (2005). EEG-based neuroprosthesis control: A step \u173 ?towards clinical practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Neuroscience Letters, 382,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  169\'d0174.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Mullineaux, D. R., Bartlett, R. M., & Bennett, S. (2001). \u173 ?
Research design and statistics in biomechanics and motor control. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 19,}
{\fs16  739\'d0760.}{\fs16 \par Mumford, N., Duckworth, J., Thomas, J.R., Shum, D., \line Williams, G., & Wilson, P.H. (2012). Upper-limb virtual rehabilitation for traumatic brain injury: A preliminary within-group evaluation of the elements system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain Injury, 26}{\fs16 (2), 166\'d0176.\par Munzert, J., Lorey, B., & Zentgraf, K. (2009). Cognitive motor processes: The role of motor imagery in the study of motor representations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain Research Reviews, 60, }{\fs16 306\'d0326. \par Murphy, S. M. (1994). Imagery interventions in sport. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 26,}{\fs16  \line 486\'d0494.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16
Nabavinik, M., Abaszadeh, A., Mehranmanesh, M., & Rosenbaum, D. A. (2018). Especial skills in experienced archers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Motor Behavior, 50}{\fs16 (3), 249}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 253.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Nagel, M. J., & Rice, M. S. (2001). Cross-transfer effects in the upper extremity during an occupationally embedded exercise. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 55,}{\fs16  317\'d0323.}{\fs16 \par Navon, D., & Gopher, D. (1979). On the economy of the human processing system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 86,}{\fs16  214\'d0255.}{\fs16 \par Naylor, J., & Briggs, G. (1963). Effects of task complexity and task organization on the relative efficiency of part and whole training methods. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65,}{\fs16  217\'d0244.\par }{\fs16 Nee, D. E., Berman, M. G., Moore, K. S., & Jonides, J. (2008). Neuroscientific evidence about the distinction between short- and long-term memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Science, 17,}{\fs16  102\'d0106.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Nelson, T. O. (Ed.). (1992). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Metacognition: Core readings}{\fs16 . Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.}
{\fs16 \par Neumann, O. (1996). Theories of attention. In O. Neumann & A. F. Sanders (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Handbook of perception and action: Vol. 3. Attention}{\fs16  (pp. 389\'d0446). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.\par }{\fs16 Neumann, W-J., Schroll, H., de Almeida Marcelino, A. L., Horn, A., Ewert, S., Irmen, F., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'c9}{\fs16  K}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9f}{\fs16 hn, A. A. (2018). Functional segregation of basal ganglia pathways in Parkinson\rquote s disease. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain, 141}{\fs16 (9), 2655}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 2669.\par }{\fs16 Newell, K. M. (1986). Constraints on the development of \line coordination. In M. G. Wade & H. T. A. Whiting (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor development in children: Aspects of coordination and control}{\fs16  (pp. 341\'d0360). The Hague, The Netherlands: Nijhoff.}
{\fs16 \par Newell, K. M., & Cesari, P. (1999). On taking the grasping out of prehension. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 3,}
{\fs16  285\'d0288.\par Newell, K. M., Liu, Y., & Mayer-Kress, G. (2001). Time scales in motor learning and development. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Review, 108, }{\fs16 57\'d082.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Newell, K. M., & Vaillancourt, D. E. (2001). Dimensional change in motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Human Movement Science, 20, }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 695\'d0715.\par }{\fs16 Nicholson, V. P., Keogh, J. W. L., & Choy, N. L. L. (2018). Can a single session of motor imagery promote motor learning of locomotion in older adults? A randomized controlled trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical Interventions in Aging, 13,}{\fs16  713}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 722.}{\fs16 \par Nideffer, R. M. (1993). Attention control training. In R. N. Singer, M. Murphey, & L. K. Tennant (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Handbook of research on sport psychology}{\fs16  (pp. 542\'d0556). New York, NY: Macmillan.\par }
{\fs16 Nordin, A. D., Hairston, W. D., & Ferris, D. P. (2018). Dual-electrode motion artifact cancellation for mobile electroencephalography. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neural Engineering, 15,}{\fs16  056024.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Nordin, S. M., & Cumming, J. (2005). Professional dancers describe their imagery: Where, when, why, what, and how. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Sport Psychologist, 19,}{\fs16  395\'d0416.\par Nordin, S. M., & Cumming, J. (2007). Where, when, and how: A quantitative account of dance imagery. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 78,}{\fs16  390\'d0395.}{\fs16 \par Norman, D. A. (1968). Toward a theory of memory and \u173 ?
attention. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 75,}{\fs16  522\'d0536.\par }{\fs16 North, J. S., & Williams, A. M. (2008). Identifying the critical time period for information extraction when recognizing sequences of play. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 79,}{\fs16  268\'d0273.}{\fs16 \par Nowak, D. A., & Hermsd}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9a}{\fs16 rfer, J. (2003). Selective deficits of grip force control during object manipulation in patients }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 with reduced sensibility of the grasping digits. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience Research, 47,}
{\fs16  65}{\fs16 \'d072.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 O\rquote Keefe, S. L., Harrison, A. J., & Smyth, P. J. (2007). Transfer or specificity? An applied investigation into the relationship between fundamental overarm throwing and related sport skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Physical Education and Sport Pedagogy, 12, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 89\'d0102.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0
\par }{\fs16 Ollis, S., Button, C., & Fairweather, M. (2005). The influence of professional expertise and task complexity upon the \u173 ?
potency of the contextual interference effect. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 118,}{\fs16  229\'d0244.\par Oliveira, F. T. P., & Ivry, R. B. (2008). The representation of action: Insights from bimanual control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17}{\fs16 (2), 130\'d0135.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Ong, N. T., & Hodges, N. J. (2012). Mixing it up a little: How to schedule observational practice. In N. J. Hodges & A.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\'ca}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 M. Williams (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Skill acquisition in sport: Research, theory and practice}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  (2nd ed., pp. 22\'d039). New York, NY: Routledge.\par }{\fs16 O\rquote Shea, S., Morris, M. E., & Iansek, R. (2002). Dual task \u173 ?
interference during gait in people with Parkinson}{\fs16 \rquote s disease: \u173 ?Effects of motor versus cognitive secondary tasks. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 82,}{\fs16  888\'d0897.}{\fs16 \par Osman, M., Bird, G., & Heyes, C. (2005). Action observation supports effector-dependent learning of finger movement sequences. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 165,}{\fs16  19\'d027.}{\fs16 \par Oudejans, R. R. D., van de Langenberg, R. W., & Hunter, R. I. \line (2002). Aiming at a far target under different viewing \u173 ?
conditions: Visual control in basketball jump shooting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 21,}{\fs16  457\'d0480.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Page, S. J., Levine, P., & Leonard, A. C. (2005). Effects of \u173 ?mental practice on affected limb use and function in chronic stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 86,}{\fs16  399\'d0402.\par Page, S. J., Levine, P., & Leonard, A. C. (2007). Mental practice in chronic stroke: Results of a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Stroke, 38,}{\fs16  1293\'d01297.\par }{\fs16 Page, S. J., Levine, P., Sisto, S. A., & Johnston, M. V. (2001). }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Mental practice combined with physical practice for \u173 ?upper-}{\fs16 limb motor deficit in subacute stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical \u173 ?Therapy, 81,}{\fs16  1455\'d01462.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Page, S. J., Szaflarski, J. P., Eliassen, J. C., Pan, H., & Cramer, S. C. (2009). Cortical plasticity following motor skill learning during mental practice in stroke. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 23, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 382\'d0388.\par Paillard, J. (1980). The multichanneling of visual cues for the processing of spatial relationship. In G. E. Stelmach & J.\u8239 ?
Requin (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Tutorials in motor behavior}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  (pp. }{\fs16 259\'d0279). Amsterdam: North-Holland.\par }
{\fs16 Panchuk, D., Spittle, M., Johnston, N., & Spittle, S. (2013). Effect of practice distribution and experience on the performance and retention of a discrete sport skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual & Motor Skills: Learning & Memory, 116,}{\fs16  750}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 760.}{\fs16
\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Panzer, S., & Shea, C. H. (2008). The learning of two similar complex movement sequences: Does practice insulate a sequence from interference? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Human Movement Science, 27,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  873\'d0887.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4
Panzer, S., Wilde, H., & Shea, C. H. (2006). The learning of two similar complex movement sequences: Proactive and retroactive effects on learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Journal of Motor Behavior, 38,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  60\'d070.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Paola, M., Caltagirone, C., & Petrosini, L. (2013). Prolonged rock climbing activity induces structural changes in cerebellum and parietal lobe. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Brain Mapping, 34, }{\fs16 2707\'d02714.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Park, I. S., Lee, K. J., Han, J. W., Lee, N. J., Lee, W. T., Park, }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 K. A.,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  & Rhyu, I. J. (2009). Experience-dependent plasticity }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 of cerebellar vermis in basketball players. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Cerebellum, 8}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 334.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }{\fs16 Park, I. S., Lee, Y. N., Kwon, S., Lee, N. J., Rhyu, I. J. (2015). White matter plasticity in the cerebellum of elite basketball athletes. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Anatomy & Cell Biology, 48,}{\fs16  262\'d0267.}{\fs16 \par Parsons, M. W., Harrington, D. L., & Rao, S. M. (2005). \u173 ?
Distinct neural systems underlie learning visuomotor and spatial representations of motor skills. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Human Brain \u173 ?Mapping, 24}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 , }{\fs16 229\'d0247.\par Pashler H., & Harris C. R. (2001). Spontaneous allocation of visual attention: Dominant role of uniqueness. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8,}{\fs16  747\'d0752.\par Patla, A. E., Niechwiej, E., Racco, V., }
{\fs16 & Goodale, M. A. (2002). Understanding the contribution of binocular vision to the control of adaptive locomotion. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 142,}{\fs16  551\'d0561.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Pau, M., Arippa, F., Leban, B., Corona, F., Ibba, G., Todde, F., \line & Scorcu, M. (2014). Relationship between static and dynamic balance abilities in Italian professional and youth league soccer players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy in Sport, 16}{\fs16 , 236\'d0241.\par Pauwels, L., Swinnen, S., & Beets, I. A. M. (2014). Contextual interference in complex bimanual skill learning leads to better skill persistence. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS ONE, 9}{\fs16 (6), e100906.\par Pellecchia, G. L. (2005). Dual-task training reduces impact of cognitive task on postural sway. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  239\'d0246.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perez, M. A., Tanaka, S}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 .}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 , Wise, S. P., Sadato, N., Tanabe, H. C., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\fs16
Willingham, D. T., & Cohen, L. G. (2007). Neural substrates of intermanual transfer of a newly acquired motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Current Biology, 17,}{\fs16  1896\'d01902.}{\fs16 \par Perruchet, P., Chambaron, S., & Ferrel-Chapus, C. (2003). Learning from implicit learning literature: Comment on Shea, Wulf, Whitacre, and Park (2001). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56A,}{\fs16  769\'d0778.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Petersen, T. H., Rosenberg, K., Petersen, N. C., & Nielsen, J. B. (2009). Cortical involvement in anticipatory postural reactions in man. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Experimental Brain Research, 193,}{\fs16  161\'d0171.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Peterson, L. R., & Peterson, M. J. (1959). Short-term retention of individual verbal items. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58,}{\fs16  193\'d0198.\par Pistohl, T., Schulze-Bonhage, A., Aertsen, A., Mehring, C., & Ball, T. (2012). Decoding natural grasp types from human ECoG. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 59, }{\fs16 248\'d0260.\par }{\fs16 Platt, M. L., & Glimcher, P. W. (1999). Neural correlates }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 of decision variables in parietal cortex. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Nature, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
\line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 400,}{\fs16  233\'d0238.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Poldrack, R. A., }{\fs16 Sabb, F. W., Foerde, K., Tom, S. M., Asamov, R.F., Bookheimer, S.Y., & Knowlton, B.J. (2005). The neural correlates of motor skill automaticity. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 25}{\fs16 (22), 5356\'d05364.\par Polit, A., & Bizzi, E. (1978). Processes controlling arm \u173 ?
movements in monkeys. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science, 201,}{\fs16  1235\'d01237.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Pollock, B. J., & Lee, T. D. (1992). Effects of the model\rquote s skill level on observational learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for \u173 ?Exercise and Sport, 63,}{\fs16  25\'d029.\par Pollok, B., M}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'9f}{\fs16 ller, K., Ascherleben, G., Schnitzler, A., & Prinz,\u8239 ?}{\fs16 W. (2004). The role of the primary somatosensory cortex in an auditorily paced finger tapping task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 156,}{\fs16  111\'d0117.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Pomeroy, V. M., Clark, C. A., Miller, J., Simon, G., Baron, J. C., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\fs16 Markus, H. S., }{\fs16 & Tallis, R. C. (2005). The potential for \u173 ?utilizing the \ldblquote mirror neuron system\rdblquote  to enhance recovery of the severely affected upper limb early after stroke: }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 A \u173 ?review and hypothesis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neurorehabilitation and Neural \u173 ?Repair, 19,}
{\fs16  4\'d013.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Pope, P., Wing, A. M., Praamstra, P., & Miall, R. C. (2005). Force related activations in rhythmic sequence productions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 27,}{\fs16  909\'d0918.\par }{\fs16 Porter, J. M. (2008). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Systematically increasing contextual interference is beneficial for learning novel motor skills}{\fs16 . Ph}{\fs16 D dissertation, Louisiana State University. [}
{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 Available online at }{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw0 http://etd.lsu.edu/docs/available/etd-04042008-112837/}
{\fs16 ]}{\fs16 \par Porter, J. M., & Magill, R. A. (2010). Systematically \u173 ?increasing contextual interference is beneficial for learning sport skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Sports Sciences, 28,}{\fs16  1277\'d01285.\par Porter, J. M., Ostrowski, E. J., Nolan, R. P., & Wu, W. F. W. (2010). Standing long-jump performance is enhanced when using an external focus of attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 24}{\fs16 (7), 1746\'d01750. \par Porter, J. M., Wu, W. F. W., & Partridge, J. A. (2009). Focus of attention: Perspectives from elite track and field athletes at the 2007 USA track and field national \u173 ?
championships. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 31S,}{\fs16  92\'d093.\par Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and action planning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9,}{\fs16  129\'d0154.}{\fs16 \par Proctor, R., & Reeve, T. G. (Eds.). (1990). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Stimulus-response compatibility: An integrated perspective.}{\fs16  Amsterdam: North-Holland.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Proctor, R. W., Vu, K. P. L., & Pick, D. F. (2005). Aging and \u173 ?response selection in spatial choice tasks. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Factors, 47,}{\fs16  250\'d0269.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Proske, U. (2015). The role of muscle proprioceptors in human limb position sense: A hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Anatomy, 227}{\fs16 , 178\'d0183.\par Proske, U., & Gandevia, S. C. (2009). The kinaesthetic senses. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Physiology, 587}{\*\cs3\f1\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw-1 (17)}{\fs16 , 4139\'d04146.\par }
{\fs16 Proteau, L. (1992). On the specificity of learning and the role of visual information for movement control. In L. Proteau & D. Elliott (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Vision and motor control}{\fs16  (pp. 67\'d0103). Amsterdam: North-Holland.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16
Proteau, L., Boivin, K., Linossier, S., & Abahnini, K. (2000). Exploring the limits of peripheral vision for the control of movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 32,}{\fs16  277}{\fs16 \'d0286.\par Proteau, L., & Marteniuk, R. G. (1993). Static visual information and the learning and control of a manual aiming \u173 ?
movement. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 12,}{\fs16  515}{\fs16 \'d0536.\par }{\fs16 Proteau L., Tremblay, L., & DeJaeger, D. (1998). Practice does not diminish the role of visual information in on-line control of a precision walking task: Support for a specificity of practice hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 30,}{\fs16  143}{\fs16 \'d0150.\par }{\fs16 Puttermans, V., Wenderoth, N., & Swinnen, S. P. (2005). Changes in brain activation during the acquisition of a \u173 ?
multifrequency bimanual coordination task: From the \u173 ?cognitive stage to advanced levels of automaticity. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Neuroscience, 25,}{\fs16  4270\'d04278.\par }{\fs16 Rabin, E., & Gordon, A. M. (2004). Tactile feedback \u173 ?contributes to consistency of finger movements during \u173 ?
typing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 155,}{\fs16  362\'d0369.}{\fs16 \par Radlo, S. J., Sternberg, G. M., Singer, R. N., Barba, D. A., & Melnikov, A. (2002). The influence of an attentional focus strategy on alpha brain wave activity, heart rate, and dart-throwing performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport \u173 ?Psychology, 33,}{\fs16  205}{\fs16 \'d0217.\par }{\fs16
Ringhof, S., & Stein, T. (2018). Biomechanical assessment of dynamic balance: Specificity of different balance tests. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Movement Science, 58,}{\fs16  140}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 147.}{\fs16 \par Raibert, M. H. (1977). Motor control and learning by the state-space model (Tech. Rep. No. AI-TR-439). Cambridge, MA: MIT, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Rao, A. K., & Gordon, A. M. (2001). Contributions of tactile information to accuracy in pointing movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 138,}{\fs16  438\'d0445.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Redelmeier, D. A., & Tibshirani, R. J. (1997). Association \u173 ?between cellular-telephone calls and motor vehicle }
{\fs16 collisions. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 New England Journal of Medicine, 336,}{\fs16  453\'d0458.}{\fs16 \par Reed, C. L., Klatzky, R. L., & Halgren, E. (2005). What vs. where in touch: An fMRI study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 25,}{\fs16  718\'d0726.\par }{\fs16 Reimer, B., & Sodhi, M. (2006). Detecting eye movements in dynamic environments. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Behavior Research Methods, 38,}{\fs16  667\'d0682.}{\fs16 \par Reiser, M., B}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'9f}{\fs16 sch, D., & Munzert, J. (2011). Strength gains by motor imagery with different ratios of physical to mental practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology, 2, }{\fs16 194. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00194.\par Rice, M. S. (1998). Purposefulness and cross transfer in a \u173 ?
forearm supination and pronation task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Scandinavian \u173 ?Journal of Occupational Therapy, 5,}
{\fs16  31\'d037.\par }{\fs16 Rice, N. J., Tunik, E., Cross, E. S., & Grafton, S. T. (2007). On-line grasp control is mediated by the contralateral hemisphere. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain Research, 1175,}{\fs16  76\'d084.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Rice, N. J., Tunik, E., & Grafton, S. T. (2006). The anterior intraparietal sulcus mediates grasp execution, independent of requirement to update: New insights from transcranial magnetic}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 stimulation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 26,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  8176\'d08182.\par }{\fs16 Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., B}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9f}{\fs16 chel, C., Kiebel, S., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Weiller, C. (1999). A blueprint for movement: Functional and anatomical representations in the human motor system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 19,}{\fs16  8043\'d08048.}{\fs16 \par Ring, C., Cooke, A., Kavussanu, M., McIntyre, D., & Masters, R. (2015). Investigating the efficacy of neurofeedback training for expediting expertise and excellence in sport. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 16}{\fs16 , 118\'d0127.\par Rink, J. E. (1998). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Teaching physical education for learning}{\fs16  (3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.}{\fs16 \par Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron \u173 ?
system. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27,}{\fs16  169\'d0192.\par }{\fs16 Robertson, R., St. Germain, L., Ste-Marie, D. (2018). The effects of self-observation when combined with a skilled model on the learning of gymnastics skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Learning and Development, 6,}{\fs16  18}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 34.\par }{\fs16 Robertson, S., Collins, J., Elliott, D., & Starkes, J. (1994). The influence of skill and intermittent vision on dynamic balance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  333\'d0339.}{\fs16 \par Robertson, S., & Elliott, D. (1996). The influence of skill in gymnastics and vision on dynamic balance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 27,}{\fs16  361\'d0368}{\fs16 .\par Robertson, S. D., Zelaznik, H. N., Lantero, D. A., Bojczyk, K.\u8239 ?
G., Spencer, R. M., Doffin, J. G., & Schneidt, T. (1999). Correlations for timing consistency among tapping and drawing tasks: Evidence against a single timing process in motor control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: \u173 ?Human Perception and Performance, 25,}{\fs16  1316}
{\fs16 \'d01330.\par Roca, A., Ford, P. R., McRobert, A. P., & Williams, A. M. (2013). Perceptual-cognitive skills and their interaction as a function of task constraints in soccer. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 35}{\fs16 , 144\'d0155.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4
Rocha, P. A., Porfirio, G. M., Ferraz, H. B., & Trevisani, V. F. M. (2014). Effects of external cues on gait parameters of Parkinson}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \rquote }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 s disease patients: A systematic review. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 124,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4  127}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 134.}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4 Rochester, L., Burn, D. J., Woods, G., Godwin, J., & }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-4\u173 ?
Nieuwboer, A.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \line }{\fs16 (2009). Does auditory rhythmical }{\fs16\u173 ?}{\fs16 cueing }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
improve gait in people with Parkinson\rquote s disease and \u173 ?cognitive}{\fs16  impairment? A feasibility study. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Movement }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0\u173 ?Disorders, 24,}{\fs16  839\'d0845.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Rohleder, J., & Vogt, T. (2018). Teaching novices the handstand: A practical approach of different sport-specific feedback concepts on movement learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science of Gymnastics Journal,}{\fs16  10, 29}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 42.}{\fs16 \par Rogers, C. A. (1974). Feedback precision and postfeedback \u173 ?
interval duration. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102,}{\fs16\u8239 ?604}{\fs16 \'d0608.\par }
{\fs16 Rokni, U., & Sompolinsky, H. (2012). How the brain generates movement. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neural Computation, 24}
{\fs16 (2), 289}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 331.\par Ronkema, S., Bongers, R. M., & van der Sluis, C.K. (2017). Influence of type of training task on intermanual transfer effects in upper-limb prosthesis training: A randomized pre-posttest study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS ONE}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  12}{\fs16 (11)}
{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  e0188362. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188362}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Rose, D.}{\fs16  J., Lucchese, N., & Wiersma, L. D. (2006). Development of a multidimensional balance scale for use with functionally independent older adults. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 87,}{\fs16  1478\'d01485.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Rose, J., Wolff, D. R., Jones, V. K., Bloch, D. A., Oehlert, J. W., &}{\fs16  Gamble, J. G. (2002). Postural balance in children with cerebral palsy. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 44,}{\fs16  58\'d063.\par Rosenbaum, D. A. (1980). Human movement initiation: \u173 ?
Specification of arm, direction, and extent. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology: General, 109,}
{\fs16  444}{\fs16 \'d0474.\par Rosenbaum, D. A. (1983). The movement precuing \line technique: Assumptions, applications, and extensions. In \line R. A. Magill (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory and control of action}{\fs16  }{\fs16 (pp. 251\'d0274).}{\fs16  \u173 ?Amsterdam: North-Holland.}
{\fs16 \par Rosenbaum, D. A. (2011). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human motor control }{\fs16 (2nd ed.)}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
.}{\fs16  San Diego, CA: Academic Press.\par }{\fs16 Rosenbaum, D. A., Cohen R. G., Meulenbroek, R. G., & Vaughan J. (2006). Plans for grasping objects. In M. Latash & F. Lestienne (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor control and learning over the lifespan }{\fs16 (pp}{\fs16 . 9\'d025). Berlin}{\fs16 : }
{\fs16 Springer.}{\fs16 \par Rosenbaum, D. A., & Jorgensen, M. J. (1992). Planning \u173 ?macroscopic aspects of manual control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 11,}{\fs16  61\'d069.}{\fs16 \par Rosenbaum, D. A., van Heutgen, C. M., & Caldwell, G. E. }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 (1996). From cognition to biomechanics and back: The \u173 ?end-}{\fs16 state comfort effect and the middle is faster effect. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta\u8239 ?Psychologica, 94,}{\fs16  59}{\fs16 \'d085.\par }{\fs16 Rossignol, S., Dubuc, R., & Gossard, J. P. (2006). Dynamic sensorimotor interactions in locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physiological Reviews, 86,}{\fs16  89\'d0154.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 Rothstein, A. L., & Arnold, R. K. (1976). Bridging the \line gap: \u173 ?
Application of research on videotape feedback \line and \u173 ?bowling. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Motor Skills: Theory into Practice, 1,}
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3  36}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw3 \'d061.\par }{\fs16 Ruffaldi, E., Filippeschi, A., Avizzano, C. A., Bardy, B., Gopher, D., & Bergamasco, M. (2011). Feedback, affordances, and accelerators for training sports in virtual environments. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Presence, 20,}{\fs16  33\'d046.\par }{\fs16 Ruffino, C., Papaxanthis, C., & Lebon, F. (2017). The influence of imagery capacity in motor performance improvement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 235,}{\fs16  2049}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 3057.\par }{\fs16 Saemi, E., Porter, J.M., Varzaneh, A.G., Zarghami, M., & Shafania, P. (2012). Practicing along the contextual interference continuum: A comparison of three practice schedules in an elementary physical education setting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Kinesiology, 44}{\fs16 (2), 191\'d0198.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Sakurai, S., & Ohtsuki, T. (2000). Muscle activity and accuracy of performance of the smash stroke in badminton with }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2\u173 ?
reference to skill and practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Sports Sciences, \line 18}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
,}{\fs16  901\'d0914.\par Saling, M., Alberts, J., Stelmach, G. E., & Bloedel, J. R. (1998). Reach-to-grasp movements during obstacle \u173 ?
avoidance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 118,}{\fs16  251\'d0258.\par Salmoni, A. W., Schmidt, R. A., & Walter, C. B. (1984). Knowledge of results and motor learning: A review and reappraisal. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Bulletin, 95,}{\fs16  355\'d0386.\par }{\fs16 Sapountzis, P., Paneri, S., & Gregoriou, G. G. (2018). Distinct roles of prefrontal and parietal areas in the encoding of attentional priority. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115}{\fs16 (37), E8755}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 E8764.}
{\fs16 \par Savelsbergh, G. J. P., Whiting, H. T. A., Pijpers, J. R., & van Santvoord, A. A. M. (1993). The visual guidance of \u173 ?
catching. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 93,}{\fs16  148\'d0156.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Savelsbergh, G. J. P., Williams, A. M., van der Kamp, J., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 & Ward, P. (2002). Visual search, anticipation and expertise in soccer goal keepers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Sports Sciences, 200,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  279\'d0287.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Schaffert, N., Janzen, T. B., Mattes, K., & Thaut, M. H. (2019). }
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 A review on the relationship between sound and movement in sports and rehabilitation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3
Frontiers in Psychology, 10}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 (244). }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00244.\par Schmahmann, J. D. (2019). The cerebellum and cognition. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience Letters, 688,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  62}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
75.\par }{\fs16 Schendel, J. D., }{\fs16 & Hagman, J. D. (1982). On sustaining \u173 ?procedural skills over a prolonged retention interval. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Psychology, 67,}{\fs16  605\'d0610.\par Schmidt, R. A. (1975). A schema theory of discrete motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 82,}{\fs16  225\'d0260.\par Schmidt, R. A. (1985). The search for invariance in skilled movement behavior. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 56,}{\fs16  188\'d0200.\par Schmidt, R. A. (1988). Motor and action perspectives on motor behavior. In O. G. Meijer & K. Roth (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Complex motor behaviour: \ldblquote The\rdblquote  motor-action controversy}{\fs16  (pp. 3\'d044). Amsterdam: Elsevier.\par Schmidt, R.A. (1993). Unintended acceleration: Human performance considerations. In B. Peacock & W. Karwowski (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Automotive ergonomics}{\fs16  (pp. 431\'d0451). London: Taylor & Francis.\par }{\fs16 Schmidt, R. A. (2003). Motor schema theory after 27 years: \u173 ?
Reflections and implications for a new theory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 74,}
{\fs16  366\'d0379.}{\fs16 \par Schmidt, R. A., Lange, C., & Young, D. E. (1990). Optimizing summary knowledge of results for skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 9,}{\fs16  325\'d0348.}{\fs16 \par Schmidt, R. A., & Lee, T. D. (2011). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor control and learning: A behavioral emphasis}{\fs16  (5th ed.). Champaign, IL: \u173 ?Human Kinetics.}
{\fs16 \par Schmidt, R. A., & Young, D. E. (1987). Transfer of movement control in motor skill learning. In S. M. Cormier & J. D. Hagman (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Transfer of learning}{\fs16  (pp. 47\'d079). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Schmidt, R. A., Young, D. E., Swinnen, S., & Shapiro, D. C. (1989). Summary knowledge of results for skill acquisition: Support for the guidance hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
 352\'d0359.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Schmidt, R. A., Zelaznik, H. N., Hawkins, B., Frank, J. S., & Quinn, J. T., Jr. (1979). Motor output variability: A theory for the accuracy of rapid motor acts. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Psychological Review, 86,}{\fs16  415\'d0451.}{\fs16 \par Schneider, K., Zernicke, R. F., Schmidt, R. A., & Hart, T. J. (1989). Changes in limb dynamics during the practice of rapid arm movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Biomechanics, 22,}{\fs16  805\'d0817.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Schoenfelder-Zohdi, B. G. (1992). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Investigating the informational nature of a modeled visual demonstration.}{\fs16  PhD \u173 ?
dissertation, Louisiana State University.\par Sch}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9a}{\fs16 llhorn, W. I., Mayer-Kress, G., Newell, K. M., & \u173 ?
Michelbrink, M. (2009). Time scales of adaptive behavior and motor learning in the presence of stochastic pertur\u173 ?bations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 28,}{\fs16  319\'d0333.\par Schuster, C., Hilfiker, R., Amft, O., Scheidhauer, A., Andrews, B., Butler, J., .\'ca.\'ca. Ettlin, T. (2011). Best practice for motor imagery: A systematic literature review on motor imagery training elements in five different disciplines. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 BMC Medicine, 9,}{\fs16  75. doi: 10.1186/1741\'d07015-9\'d075.\par }{\fs16 Scott, M. A., van der Kamp, J., Savelsbergh, G. J. P., \line Oudejans, R. R. D., & Davids, K. (2004). Object rotation effects on the timing of a hitting action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for \u173 ?Exercise and Sport, 75,}{\fs16  130\'d0137.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Scully, D. M., & Newell, K. M. (1985). Observational learning and the acquisition of motor skills: Toward a visual perception perspective. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 11,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  169\'d0186.\par }{\fs16 Seidler, R. D. (2007). Older adults can learn to learn new motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Behavioral Brain Research, 183,}{\fs16  118\'d0122.\par Seidler, R. D. (2010). Neural correlates of motor learning, transfer of learning, and learning to learn. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Exercise and Sport Science Reviews, 38,}{\fs16  3\'d09.\par }{\fs16 Seifert, L., Chollet, D., & Allard, F. (2004). Arm coordination symmetry and breathing effect in front crawl. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 24,}{\fs16  234\'d0256.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Seifert, L., Chollet, D., & Bardy, B. (2004). Effect of }
{\fs16 swimming velocity on arm coordination in the front crawl: A \u173 ?dynamic analysis. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 22,}
{\fs16  651}{\fs16 \'d0660.\par }{\fs16 Seifert, L., Schnitzler, C., Bideault, G., Alberty, M., Chollet, D., & Toussaint, H. M. (2015). Relationships between coordination, active drag and propelling efficiency in crawl. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 39}{\fs16 , 55\'d064.\par Selder, D. J., & Del Rolan, N. (1979). Knowledge of perfor\u173 ?
mance, skill level and performance on the balance beam. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Canadian Journal of Applied Sport Sciences, 4,}
{\fs16  226\'d0229.\par Sell, T. C. (2012). An examination, correlation, and comparison of static and dynamic measures of postural stability in healthy, physically active adults. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy in Sport, 13,}{\fs16  80\'d086.\par Seller, B. D., Monsma, E. V., & Newman-Norlund, R. D. (2015). Biological evidence of imagery abilities: Intraindividual differences. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 and}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Exercise Psychology, 37}
{\fs16 (4), 421\'d0435.\par Servos, P. (2000). Distance estimation in the visual and visuomotor systems. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 130,}{\fs16  35}{\fs16 \'d047.\par Shadmehr, R., & Brashers-Krug, T. (1997). Functional stages in the formulation of human long-term motor memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 17,}{\fs16  409}{\fs16 \'d0419.\par }{\fs16 Shakudo, M., Takegami, M., Shibata, A., Kuzumaki, M., }
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5 Higashi, T., Hayashino, Y., }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5 \'c9}{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5  Fukuhara, S. (2011). }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5
\line }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5 Effect of feedback in promoting adherence to an }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
exercise programme: A randomized controlled trial. }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd1\expndtw5 Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice.}
{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5  }{\fs16\expnd1\expndtw5 \line }{\fs16 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2753.2009/01342.x.}{\fs16 \par Shank, M. D., & Haywood, K. M. (1987). Eye movements while viewing a baseball pitch. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 64,}{\fs16  1191\'d01197.\par Shapiro, D. C., Zernicke, R. F., Gregor, R. J., & Diestel, J. D. (1981). Evidence for generalized motor programs using gait-pattern analysis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 13,}{\fs16  \line 33\'d047.\par }{\fs16 Shea, C. H., Buchanan, J. J., & Kennedy, D. M. (2016). Perception and action influences on discrete and reciprocal bimanual coordination. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychonomics Bulletin Review, 23, }{\fs16 361}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 386.}{\fs16 \par Shea, C. H., & Kohl, R. M. (1990). Specificity and variability of practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 61,}{\fs16  169\'d0177.\par Shea, C. H., & Kohl, R. M. (1991). Composition of practice: Influence on the retention of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 62,}{\fs16  187\'d0195.\par Shea, C. H., Kohl, R., & Indermill, C. (1990). Contextual interference contributions of practice. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 73,}{\fs16  145\'d0157.\par Shea, C. H., Lai, Q., Black, C., & Park, J. C. (2000). Spacing practice sessions across days benefits the learning of motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 19,}{\fs16  737\'d0760.\par Shea, C. H., }{\fs16 & Wright, D. L. (1995). Contextual dependencies: Influence on response latency. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory, 3,}{\fs16  81\'d095.\par Shea, C. H., }{\fs16 & Wulf, G. (2005). Schema theory: A critical \u173 ?
appraisal and reevaluation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,}{\fs16  85\'d0101.}{\fs16 \par Shea, J. B. (1977). Effects of labeling on motor short-term memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 3,}{\fs16  92\'d099.\par Shea, J. B., }
{\fs16 & Morgan, R. L. (1979). Contextual interference effects on the acquisition, retention, and transfer of a motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 5,}{\fs16  179\'d0187.}{\fs16 \par Shea, J. B., & Zimny, S. T. (1983). Context effects in memory and learning in movement information. In R. A. Magill (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory and control of action}{\fs16  (pp. 345\'d0366). \u173 ?Amsterdam: North-Holland.}{\fs16
\par Shepherd, R. B., & Gentile, A. M. (1994). Sit-to-stand: Functional relationship between upper and lower body limb \u173 ?segments. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 13,}{\fs16  817\'d0840.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Sheridan, M. R. (1984). Response programming, response \u173 ?production, and fractionated reaction time. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Research, 46,}{\fs16  33\'d047.}{\fs16 \par Sherrington, C. S. (1906). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Integrative action of the nervous \u173 ?
system.}{\fs16  New York, NY: Scribner.\par Sherwood, D. E. (1988). Effect of bandwidth knowledge of \u173 ?results on movement consistency. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 66,}{\fs16  535\'d0542.\par Sherwood, D. E. (1994). Hand preference, practice order, and spatial assimilation in rapid bimanual movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  123}{\fs16 \'d0134.\par }{\fs16 Sherwood, D. E. (2008). Generalization of error detection across motor tasks by men and women. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 106,}{\fs16  557\'d0572.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Shinar, D., Meir, M., & Ben-Shoham, I. (1998). How automatic is manual gear shifting? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Factors, 40,}{\fs16  647\'d0654.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Shoenfelt, E. L., Snyder, L. A., Maue, A. E., McDowell, C. P., \line &}
{\fs16  Woolard, C. D. (2002). Comparison of constant and \u173 ?variable practice conditions on free-throw shooting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 94,}{\fs16  1113\'d01123.\par }{\fs16 Shomstein, S., & Yantis, S. (2006). Parietal cortex mediates voluntary control of spatial and nonspatial auditory attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 26,}{\fs16  435\'d0439.}{\fs16 \par Short, M. W., & Cauraugh, J. H. (1999). Precision hypothesis and the end-state comfort effect. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 100,}{\fs16  243\'d0252.\par }{\fs16 Shumway-Cook, }{\fs16 A., & Woollacott, M. H. (2011). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor control: Translating research into clinical practice}{\fs16  (}{\fs16 4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Wilkins & Williams. \par }
{\fs16 Shumway-Cook, A., & Woolacott, M. H. (2017). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor control: Translating research into clinical practice}
{\fs16  (5th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lipponcott Wilkins & Williams.}{\fs16 \par Sidaway, B., Anderson, J., Danielson, G., Martin, L.}
{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  & Smith, G. (2006). Effects of long-term gait training using visual cues in an individual with Parkinson\rquote s }
{\fs16 disease. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 86,}{\fs16  186\'d0194.}{\fs16 \par Sidaway, B., Moore, B., }
{\fs16 & Schoenfelder-Zohdi, B. (1991). Summary and frequency of KR presentation effects on \u173 ?retention of a motor skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 62,}{\fs16  27\'d032.\par }{\fs16 Sidaway, B., Sekiya, H., }
{\fs16 & Fairweather, M. (1995). Movement variability as a function of accuracy demands in programmed aiming responses. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Journal of Motor Behavior, 27,}{\fs16  67\'d076.\par }{\fs16 Siegel, D. (1986). Movement duration, fractionated reaction time, and response programming. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 57,}{\fs16  128\'d0131.\par }{\fs16 Sigrist, R., Rauter, G., Riener, R., & Wolf, P. (2013). Terminal feedback outperforms concurrent visual, auditory, and haptic feedback in learning a complex rowing-type task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 45,}{\fs16  455}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 470}{\fs16 \par Silverman, S., Tyson, L. A., }
{\fs16 & Krampitz, J. (1991). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Teacher feedback and achievement in physical education: Interaction with student practice.}
{\fs16  Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, Illinois.\par Silverman, S., Woods, A. M., & Subramaniam, P. R. (1998). Task structures, feedback to individual students, and student skill level in physical education. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  420\'d0424.\par Silverman, S., Woods, A. M., & Subramaniam, P. R. (1999). Feedback and practice in physical education: Interrelationships with task structures and student skill level. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 36,}{\fs16  203\'d0224.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Simmering, V. R., Peterson, C., Darling, W., & Spencer, J P. (2008). Location memory biases reveal the challenges of coordinating visual and kinesthetic reference frames. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Experimental Brain Research, 184,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  165\'d0178.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par Simmons, A. L. (2011). Distributed practice and procedural memory consolidation in musicians\rquote  skill learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Research in Music Education, 20, }{\fs16 1\'d012.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  doi:10.1177/0022429411424798.\par Simmons, R. W., Smith, K., Erez, E., Burke, J. P., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 & Pozos, R.\u8239 ?E. (1998). Balance retraining in a hemiparetic patient }{\fs16 using center of gravity biofeedback: A single-case study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 87,}{\fs16  603\'d0609.\par Simon, D. A., & Bjork, R. A. (2001). Metacognition in motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27,}{\fs16  907\'d0912.}
{\fs16 \par Simons, J. P., Wilson, J., Wilson, G., & Theall, S. (2009). Challenges to cognitive bases for an especial motor skill at the regulation baseball pitching distance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 80,}{\fs16  469\'d0479.\par }{\fs16 Singer, R. N. (1986). Sports performance: A five-step mental approach. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Physical Education and Recreation, 57,}{\fs16  82\'d084.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Singer, R. N. (1988). Strategies and metastrategies in learning and performing self-paced athletic skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Sport \u173 ?Psychologist, 2,}{\fs16  49\'d068.\par Singer, R. N., Cauraugh, J. H., Chen, D., Steinberg, G. M., Frehlich, S. G., }
{\fs16 & Wang, L. (1994). Training mental \u173 ?quickness in beginning/intermediate tennis players. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
The Sport Psychologist, 8,}{\fs16  305\'d0318.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Singer, R. N., Williams, A. M., Frehlich, S. G, Janelle, C. M., Radlo, S. J., Barba, D. A., & Bouchard, L. J. (1998). New frontiers in visual search: An exploratory study in live \u173 ?
tennis situations. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  290\'d0296.}{\fs16 \par }
{\fs16 Sivak, B., & MacKenzie, C. L. (1990). Integration of visual }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0\u173 ?information and motor output in reaching and grasping: }
{\fs16 The \line contributions of peripheral and central vision. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuro\u173 ?psychologia, 28,}
{\fs16  1095\'d01116.\par Small, S. L., Buccino, G., & Solodkin, A. (2012). The mirror neuron system and treatment of stroke. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Developmental Psychobiology, 54,}{\fs16  293\'d0310.\par Smiley-Oyen, A.L., Kerr, J.P., & Lowry, K.A. (2007). Planning and control of sequential rapid aiming in adults with Parkinson\rquote s disease. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 39}{\fs16 (2), 103\'d0114.\par }{\fs16 Smith, E. E. (2000). Neural bases of human working memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9,}{\fs16  45\'d049.}{\fs16 \par Smith, W. M., & Bowen, K. F. (1980). The effects of delayed and displaced visual feedback on motor control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of\u8239 ?Motor Behavior, 12,}{\fs16  91\'d0101.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Smyth, M. M., & Marriott, A. M. (1982). Vision and proprioception in simple catching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 14,}{\fs16  143\'d0152.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Smyth, M. M., & Pendleton, L. R. (1990). Space and movement in working memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42A,}{\fs16  291\'d0304.}{\fs16 \par Smyth, M. M., & Silvers, G. (1987). Functions of vision in the control of handwriting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 65,}{\fs16  47\'d064.}{\fs16 \par Snoddy, G. S. (1926). Learning and stability: A psychophysical analysis of a case of motor learning with clinical applications. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Psychology, 10,}{\fs16  1\'d036.\par }{\fs16 Soderstrom, N. C., & Bjork, R. A. (2015). Learning versus per\u173 ?
formance: An integrative review. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perspectives on Psychologi\u173 ?cal Science, 102,}{\fs16  176\'d0199.}
{\fs16 \par Soechting, J. F., & Flanders, M. (1992). Organization of \u173 ?sequential typing movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Neurophysiology, 67,}{\fs16  1275\'d01290.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Solmon, M. A. (2015). Optimizing the role of physical education in promoting physical activity: A social-ecological approach. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 86, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 329}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 337. }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Solmon, M. A., & Boone, J. (1993). The impact of student goal orientation in physical education classes. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research \u173 ?Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 64,}{\fs16  418\'d0424.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16
Solmon, M. A., & Lee, A. M. (1996). Entry characteristics, practice variables, and cognition: Student mediation of \u173 ?instruction. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Teaching in Physical Education, 15,}{\fs16  136\'d0150.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Solomons, L. M., & Stein, G. (1896). Normal motor automatism. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 3,}{\fs16  492}{\fs16 \'d0512.\par Song, J. H., & B}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'8e}{\fs16 dard, P. (2015). Paradoxical benefits of dual-task contexts for visuomotor memory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Psychological Science, 26}{\fs16 (2), 148\'d0158.\par Southard, D., & Amos, B. (1996). Rhythmicity and preperformance ritual: Stabilizing a flexible system. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research \u173 ?Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 67,}{\fs16  288}{\fs16 \'d0296.\par Southard, D., & Higgins, T. (1987). Changing movement \u173 ?
patterns: Effects of demonstration and practice. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 58,}
{\fs16  77}{\fs16 \'d080.\par Southard, D., & Miracle, A. (1993). Rhythmicity, ritual, and motor performance: A study of free-throw shooting in \u173 ?
basketball. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, \line 64,}{\fs16  284\'d0290.\par Spaeth, R. K. (1972). Maximizing goal attainment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 43,}{\fs16  337\'d0361. \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Sparrow, W. A., Hughes, K. M., Russell, A. P., & \line }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Le \u173 ?}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Rossingnol, P. F. (1999). Effects of practice and \u173 ?preferred rate on perceived exertion, metabolic variables, and movement \u173 ?
control. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Human Movement Science, 18,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  137\'d0153.}{\fs16 \par Sparrow, W. A., & Irizarry-Lopez, V. W. (1987). Mechanical }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2\u173 ?efficiency and metabolic cost as measures of learning a novel gross motor task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Journal of Motor Behavior, 19,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  240\'d0264.\par }{\fs16 Sparrow, W. A., Lay, B. S., & O\rquote Dwyer, N. J. (2007). Metabolic and attentional energy costs of interlimb coordination. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 39,}{\fs16  259\'d0275.}{\fs16 \par Sparrow, W. A., }{\fs16 & Newell, K. M. (1994). Energy expenditure and motor performance relationships in humans learning a motor task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychophysiology, 31,}{\fs16  338\'d0346.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Spencer, R. M. C., Ivry, R. B., Cattaert, D., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 & Semjen, A.}{\fs16  (2005). Bimanual coordination during rhythmic movements in the absence of somatosensory feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \line Neurophysiology, 94,}{\fs16  2901\'d02910.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Spencer, R. M. C., Ivry, R. B., & Zelaznik, H. N. (2005). Role of the cerebellum in movements: Control of timing or movement transitions? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Experimental Brain Research, 161,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  383\'d0396.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Spencer, R. M. C., & Zelaznik, H. N. (2003). Weber (slope) analyses of timing variability in tapping and drawing tasks. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 35,}{\fs16  371\'d0381.}{\fs16 \par Spijkers, W. A. C., & Lochner, P. (1994). Partial visual feedback and spatial end-point accuracy of visual aiming \u173 ?
movements. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  283\'d0295.\par Spraker, M. B., Corcos, D. M., Kurani, A. S., Prodoehl, J., Swinnen, S. P., & Vaillancourt, D. E. (2012). Specific cerebellar regions are related to force amplitude and rate of force development. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 NeuroImage, 59}{\fs16 (2), 1647\'d01656.\par }{\fs16 Spreen, O., & Strauss, E. (1998). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
A compendium of neuropsychological tests}{\fs16  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.}{\fs16 \par Starkes, J. L., Deakin, J. M., Lindley, S., & Crisp, F. (1987). Motor versus verbal recall of ballet sequences by young \u173 ?
expert dancers. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sport Psychology, 9,}{\fs16  222\'d0230.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Steel, K. A., Mudie, K., Sandoval, R., Anderson, D., Dogramaci, S., Rehmanjan, M., & Birznieks, I. (2018). Can video self-modeling improve affected limb reach and grasp ability in stroke patients? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 50}{\fs16 (2), 117}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 126. doi: 10.1080/00222895.2017.1306480.\par Steele, C. J.}
{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  & Zatorre, R. J. (2018). Practice makes plasticity. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Nature Neuroscience, 21,}
{\fs16  1645\'d01650.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Steenbergen, B., Marteniuk, R. G., & Kalbfleisch, L. E. (1995). Achieving coordination in prehension: Joint freezing and postural contributions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 27,}{\fs16  333\'d0348.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Ste-Marie, D. M. (2000). Motor learning through observation: Contributions of attention and retention process. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 38,}{\fs16  323\'d0349.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Ste-Marie, D. M., Clark, S. E., Findlay, L. C., & Latimer, A. E. \line }
{\fs16 (2004). High levels of contextual interference enhance }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 handwriting skill acquisition. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Journal of Motor Behavior, 36,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  \line }{\fs16 115\'d0126.\par Ste-Marie, D. M., & Lee, T. D. (1991). Prior processing effects on gymnastic judging. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17,}{\fs16  126\'d0136.}
{\fs16 \par Ste-Marie, D. M., Law, B., Rymal, A. M., Jenny, O., Hall, C., & McCullagh, P. (2012). Observation interventions for motor skill learning and performance: An applied model for use of observation.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 5}{\fs16 (2), 145\'d0176.\par Ste-Marie, D. M., & Valiquette, S. (1996). Enduring memory-influenced biases in gymnastic judging. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of \u173 ?Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22,}{\fs16  1498\'d01502.}
{\fs16 \par Ste-Marie, D. M., & Valiquette, S. M., & Taylor, G. (2001). Memory-influenced biases in gymnastic judging occur across different prior processing conditions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72,}{\fs16  420}{\fs16 \'d0426.\par }{\fs16 Stelmach, G. E. (1969). Prior positioning responses as a factor in short-term retention of a simple motor response. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81,}{\fs16  523}{\fs16 \'d0526.\par Stevens, D., Anderson, D. I., O\rquote Dwyer, N. J., & Williams, A. M. (2012). Does self-efficacy mediate transfer effects in the learning of easy and difficult motor skills? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Consciousness and Cognition, 21,}{\fs16  1122\'d01128.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Stewart, J. E., Dohme, J. A., & Nullmeyer, R. T. (2002). U.S. Army initial entry rotary-wing transfer of training \u173 ?}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 research. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 12,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1
 \line }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 359\'d0375.\par Stoate, I., Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2012). Enhanced expectancies improve movement efficiency in runners. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sports Sciences, 30}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 (8), 815\'d0823.\par St}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1
\'9a}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 ckel, T., & Weigelt, M. (2012). Brain lateralisation and motor learning: Selective effects of dominant and non-dominant hand practice on the early acquisition of throwing skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Laterality: Asymmetries of Body, Brain and Cognition, 17,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  18\'d037.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 St}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0\expnd0\expndtw1 \'9a}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 ckel, T., Weigelt, M., & Krug, J. (2011). Acquisition of a complex basketball-dribbling task in school children as a function of bilateral practice order. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 82,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  188}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 197.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 Stoffregen, T. A., Hove, P., Schmit, J. & Bardy, B. G. (2006). Voluntary and involuntary postural responses to imposed optic flow}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 .}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Motor Control, 10,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  24}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 33.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \par }{\fs16 Stoodley, C. J. (2012). The cerebellum and cognition: Evidence from functional imaging studies. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cerebellum, 11,}{\fs16  352\'d0365.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Strayer, D. L., & Johnston, W. A. (2001). Driven to distraction: Dual-task studies of simulated driving and conversing on a cellular telephone. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Science, 12,}{\fs16  462\'d0466.\par Strayer, D. L., Turrill, J., Cooper, J. M., Coleman, J. R., Medeiros-Ward, N., & Biondi, F. (2015). Assessing Cognitive Distraction in the Automobile. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Factors, 57}{\fs16 (8), 1300\'d01324.\par }{\fs16 Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal \u173 ?
reactions. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18}{\fs16 , 643\'d0662.}{\fs16 \par Studenka, B. E., Zelaznik, H. N., & Balasubramaniam, R. (2012). The distinction between tapping and circle drawing with and without tactile feedback: An examination of the sources of timing variance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65}{\fs16 (6), 1086\'d01100.\par Summers, J. J. (1975). The role of timing in motor program representation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 7,}{\fs16  229\'d0242.\par Swinnen, S. P. (1990). Interpolated activities during the \u173 ?
knowledge of results delay and postknowledge of results interval: Effects of performance and learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and \u173 ?Cognition, 16,}{\fs16  692}{\fs16 \'d0705.\par Swinnen, S. P., Schmidt, R. A., Nicholson, D. E., & Shapiro, D.\u8239 ?
C. (1990). Information feedback for skill acquisition: \u173 ?Instantaneous knowledge of results degrades learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16,}{\fs16  706\'d0716.\par Swinnen, S. P., Walter, C. B., Lee, T. D., & Serrien, D. J. (1993). Acquiring bimanual skills: Contrasting forms of \u173 ?
information feedback for interlimb decoupling. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and \u173 ?
Cognition, 19,}{\fs16  1321\'d01344.\par }{\fs16 Takeuchi, T., & Inomata, K. (2009). Visual search strategies and decision making in baseball batting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 108,}{\fs16  971}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 980.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Tallet, J., Kostrubiec, V., & Zanone, P.-G. (2008). The role of stability in the dynamics of learning, memorizing, and forgetting new coordination patterns. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 40}{\fs16 (2), 103\'d0116.\par Taub, E., & Berman, A. J. (1963). Avoidance conditioning in the absence of relevant proprioceptive and exteroceptive feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Comparative and Physiological \u173 ?Psychology, 56,}{\fs16  1012\'d01016.\par Taub, E., & Berman, A. J. (1968). Movement and learning in the absence of sensory feedback. In S. J. Freedman (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The neuropsychology of spatially oriented behavior}{\fs16  \line (pp. 173\'d0192). Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.\par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Taub, E., Crago, J. E., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 & Uswatte, G. (1998). Constraint-\u173 ?induced movement therapy: A new approach to treatment in\u8239 ?
physical rehabilitation. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Rehabilitation Psychology, 43,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  152\'d0170.\par }
{\fs16 Taube, W., Leukel, C., & Gollhofer, A. (2008). Influence of enhanced visual feedback on postural control and spinal reflex modulation during stance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 188}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  353\'d0361.}{\fs16
\par Teichner, W. H. (1954). Recent studies of simple reaction time. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Bulletin, 51,}
{\fs16  128\'d0149.\par Telford, C. W. (1931). Refractory phase of voluntary and \line associative responses. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 14,}{\fs16  1\'d035.\par Teulier, C., & Deligni}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8f}{\fs16 res, D. (2007). The nature of the transition between novice and skilled coordination during learning to swing. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 26,}{\fs16  376\'d0392.\par }{\fs16 Teulier, C., Nourrit, D., & Deligni}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'8f}{\fs16 res, D. (2006). Evolution of oscillatory behavior during learning on a ski simulator. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 77,}{\fs16  464\'d0475.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Than, C., Seidl, L., & Brown, J. M. (2019). Lumbar erector spinae and sacral multifidus contractile properties in healthy females and males as determined by laser displacement mechanomyography. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, 47,}{\fs16  1}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 6.\par }{\fs16 Thaut, M. H., McIntosh, G. C., Rice, R. R., Miller, R. A., \line Rathburn, J., }
{\fs16 & Brault, J. M. (1996). Rhythmic auditory stimulation in gait training for Parkinson\rquote s disease patients. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Movement Disorders, 11,}{\fs16  193\'d0200.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Thorndike, E. L. (1914). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Educational psychology: Briefer course.}
{\fs16  New York, NY: Columbia University Press.\par Thorndike, E. L., }{\fs16 & Woodworth, R. S. (1901). The influence of improvement in one mental function upon the efficiency of other functions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 8,}{\fs16  247\'d0261.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Tieri, G., Morone, G., Paolucci, S., & Iosa, M. (2018). Virtual reality in cognitive and motor rehabilitation: facts, fiction and fallacies. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Expert Review of Medical Devices, 15}{\fs16 (2), 107}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 117}{\fs16 .\par Todorov, E., Shadmehr, R., & Bizzi, E. (1997). Augmented feedback presented in a virtual environment accelerates learning of a difficult motor task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor \u173 ?Behavior, 29,}{\fs16  147\'d0158.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Tombu, M., & Jolicoeur, P. (2005). Testing the predictions of the central capacity sharing model. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  790\'d0802.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par }{\fs16 Travlos, A. K. (1999). More practice does not necessarily \u173 ?enhance transfer of learning: Evidence and interpretations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 89,}{\fs16  1161\'d01175.}{\fs16 \par Treffner, P. J., & Barrett, R. (2004). Hands-free mobile phone speech while driving degrades coordination and control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Transportation and Research, Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 7,}{\fs16  229\'d0246.}
{\fs16 \par Treisman, A. (1988). Features and objects: The fourteenth Bartlett Memorial Lecture. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40A,}{\fs16  201\'d0237.}{\fs16 \par Treisman, A., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration \u173 ?
theory of attention. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognitive Psychology, 12,}{\fs16  97\'d0136.}{\fs16 \par Tremblay, L., & Proteau, L. (1998). Specificity of practice: The case of powerlifting. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  284\'d0289.}{\fs16 \par Trevarthen, C. B. (1968). Two mechanisms of vision in \u173 ?
primates. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Research, 31,}{\fs16  299\'d0337.}{\fs16 \par Trinity, J., & Annesi, J. J. (1996, August). Coaching with video. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Strategies, 9,}{\fs16  23\'d025.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Trisolini, D. C., Petilli, M. A., & Daini, R. (2018). Is action video gaming related to sustained attention of adolescents? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 7,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1  1033}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 1039.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Tseng, M. H., & Chow, S. M. K. (2000). Perceptual-motor function of school-age children with slow handwriting speed. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 54,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  83\'d088.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
\par }{\fs16 Tsiglis, N., Zachopoulou, E., & Mavridis, T. (2001). Evaluation of the specificity of selected dynamic balance tests. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 90,}{\fs16  827\'d0833.\par Tsopani, D., Dallas, G., Tasika, N., & Tinto, A. (2012). The effect of different teaching systems in learning rhythmic gymnastics apparatus motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science of Gymnastics Journal, 4}{\fs16 (1), 55\'d062.\par Tsui, C.S.L., Gan, J.Q., & Hu, H. (2011). A self-paced motor imagery based brain-computer interface for robotic wheelchair control. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical EEG & Neuroscience, 42}{\fs16 (4), 225\'d0229.\par }{\fs16 Tugac, N., Gonzalez, D., Noguchi, K., & Niechwiej-Szwedo, E. (2019). The role of somatosensory input in target localization during binocular and monocular viewing while performing a high precision reaching and placement task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Eye Research.}{\fs16  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2018.08.013}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Psychologist, 40,}{\fs16
 385\'d0398.}{\fs16 \par Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Annual Review of Psychology, 53,}
{\fs16  1\'d025.}{\fs16 \par Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 80,}{\fs16  352\'d0373.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Turano, K. A., Yu, D., Hao, L., & Hicks, J. C. (2005). Optic-flow and egocentric-direction strategies in walking: Central vs. peripheral visual field. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Vision Research, 45,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  3117\'d03132.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }{\fs16
Turvey, M. T. (1990). Coordination. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Psychologist, 45,}{\fs16  938\'d0953.}{\fs16 \par Turvey, M. T., Holt, K. G., LaFiandra, M. E., & Fonseca, S. T. \line (1999). Can the transitions to and from running and the metabolic cost of running be determined from the kinetic energy of running? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 31,}{\fs16  265\'d0278.\par }{\fs16 Tyler, S. C., Dasgupta, S., Agosta, S., Battelli, L., & Grossman, E. D. (2015). Functional connectivity of parietal cortex during temporal selective attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cortex, 65,}{\fs16  195}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 207.}{\fs16 \par Twitmeyer, E. M. (1931). Visual guidance in motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 American Journal of Psychology, 43,}{\fs16  165\'d0187.\par Vallesi, A., McIntosh, A. R., Crescentini, C., & Stuss, D. T. (2012). fMRI investigation of speed-accuracy strategy switching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Brain Mapping, 33}{\fs16 (7), 1677\'d01688.\par van der Burgh, J. C. E., van Die}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0
\'91}{\fs16 n, J. H., & Toussaint, H. M. (2000). Lifting an unexpectedly heavy object: The effects on low-back loading and balance loss. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Clinical Biomechanics, 15}{\fs16 (7), 469\'d0477.\par Vander Linden, D. W., Cauraugh, J. H., & Greene, T. A. (1993). The effect of frequency of kinetic feedback on learning an isometric force production task in nondisabled subjects. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Physical Therapy, 73,}{\fs16  79\'d087.\par Vandorpe, B., Vandendriessche, J.B., Vaeyens, R., Pion, J., Lefevre, J., Philippaerts, R.M., & Lenoir, M. (2012). The value of a non-sport-specific motor test battery in predicting performance of young female gymnasts.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  Journal of Sports Sciences, 30}{\fs16 (5), 497\'d0505.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 van Emmerik, R. E. A., & Wagenaar, R. C. (1996). Effect of walking velocity on relative phase dynamics in the trunk in human walking. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Journal of Biomechanics, 29,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  1175\'d01184.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \par }
{\fs16 van Ginneken, W. F., Poolton, J. M., Capio, C. M., van der Kamp, J., Choi, C. S. Y., & Masters, R. S. W. (2018). Conscious control is associated with freezing of mechanical degrees of freedom during motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 50}{\fs16 (4), 436\'d0456.\par van Houwelingen, J., Willemsen, D. H. J., Kunnen, R. P. J., van Heijst, G. F., Grift, E. J., Breugem, W. P.,}
{\fs16  .\'ca.\'ca. }{\fs16 van de Water, W. (2018). The effect of finger spreading on drag of the hand in human swimming. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Biomechanics, 63}{\fs16 (3), 67}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 73.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Van Gyn, G. H., Wenger, H. A., & Gaul, C. A. (1990). Imagery as a method of enhancing transfer from training to \u173 ?
performance. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 12,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  366}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\'d0375.\par }{\fs16 van Rossum, J. H. A. (1990). Schmidt\rquote s schema theory: The \u173 ?empirical base of the variability of practice hypothesis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 9,}{\fs16  387\'d0435.\par }{\fs16 Van Maarseveen, M. J. J., Oudejans, R. R. D., & Savelsbergh, G. J. P. (2015). Pattern recall skills of talented soccer players: Two new methods applied. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 41}{\fs16 , 59\'d075.\par }{\fs16 Vera, J. G., Estrada, A. M., Alvarez, J. C. B., Sanchez, D. H., Maanan, N. M., & Dominquez, M. T. R. (2008). Effects of an additional computer simulation training programme and/or on-court specific instructions on advance cue detection in basketballers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 International Journal of Sport Psychology, 39,}{\fs16  257\'d0277.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
Verbecque, E., Da Costa, P. H. L., Vereeck, L., & Hallemans, A. \line (2015). Psychometric properties of functional balance tests in children: A literature review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 57}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 , 521\'d0529.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Vereijken, B., & Whiting, H. T. A. (1990). In defence of \u173 ?discovery learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Canadian Journal of Sport Science, 15,}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  99}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \'d0106.\par }{\fs16 Verhagen, L., Dijkerman, H.C., Medendorp, W.P., & Toni, I. \line (2012). Cortical dynamics of sensorimotor integration during grasp planning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neuroscience, 32}{\fs16 (13), 4508\'d04519.\par }{\fs16 Vernon, G., Farrow, D., & Reid, M. (2018). Returning serve in tennis: A qualitative examination of the interaction of anticipatory information sources used by professional tennis players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Psychology, 9,}{\fs16  895. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00895.\par }{\fs16 Verschueren, S. M. P., Swinnen, S. P., Cordo, P. J., & \u173 ?
Dounskaia, N. V. (1999a). Proprioceptive control of \line multijoint movement: Bimanual circle drawing. \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Experimental Brain Research, 127,}{\fs16  182\'d0192.\par Verschueren, S. M. P., Swinnen, S. P., Cordo, P. J., & \u173 ?Dounskaia, N. V. (1999b). Proprioceptive control of \line multijoint movement: Unimanual circle drawing. \line }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 127,}{\fs16  171\'d0181.\par Verschueren, S. M. P., Swinnen, S. P., Desloovere, K., & \u173 ?
Duysens, J. (2003). Vibration induced changes in EMG \u173 ?during human locomotion. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 89}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  1299\'d01307.\par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Verschueren, S. M. P., Swinnen, S. P., Dom, R., & DeWeerdt, W. \line }
{\fs16 (1997). Interlimb coordination in patients with Parkinson}{\fs16 \rquote s disease: Motor learning deficits and the importance of\u8239 ?
augmented information feedback. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain \u173 ?Research, 113,}{\fs16  497\'d0508.}
{\fs16 \par Vickers, J. N. (1992). Gaze control in putting. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, 21,}{\fs16  117\'d0132.\par Vickers, J. N. (1996). Visual control when aiming at a far \u173 ?
target. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human \u173 ?Perception and Performance, 22,}{\fs16
 342\'d0354.\par }{\fs16 Vickers, J. N. (2007). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, cognition, and decision training.}
{\fs16  Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Vitorio, R., Lirani-Silva, E., Pieruccini-Faria, F., Moraes, R., Gobbi, L. T. B., & Almeida, Q. J. (2014). Visual cues and gait improvement in Parkinson}
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \rquote }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 s disease: Which piece of info}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 r}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
mation is really important? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuroscience, 277,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3  273}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
\'d0}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 280.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Vishton, P. M., }{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 & Cutting, J. E. (1995). Wayfinding, displacements, and mental maps: Velocity fields are not typically used to determine one\rquote s aimpoint. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd-1\expndtw-3 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21,}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3
 978\'d0995.}{\fs16\expnd-1\expndtw-3 \par }{\fs16 Volcic, R., & Domini, F. (2016). On-line visual control of grasping movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Experimental Brain Research, 234,}{\fs16  2165}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 2177.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Vorro, J., Wilson, F. R., & Dainis, A. (1978). Multivariate analysis of biomechanical profiles for the coracobrachialis and biceps brachii (caput breve) muscles in humans. \u173 ?}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ergonomics, 21,}{\fs16  407\'d0418.}{\fs16 \par Wagenaar, R. C., & Beek, W. J. (1992). Hemiplegic gait: A\u8239 ?
kinematic analysis using walking speed as a basis. \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Biomechanics, 25,}{\fs16
 1007\'d01015.}{\fs16 \par Wagenaar, R. C., & van Emmerik, R. E. A. (1994). \line Dynamics of pathological gait. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Movement \line Science, 13,}{\fs16  441\'d0471.\par }{\fs16 Walker, M. P., Brakefield, T., Morgan, A., Hobson, J. A., & Stickgold, R. (2002). Practice with sleep makes perfect: sleep-dependent motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Neuron, 35}{\fs16 (1), 205\'d0211.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Wallace, S. A., & Hagler, R. W. (1979). Knowledge of perfor\u173 ?
mance and the learning of a closed motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 50,}{\fs16  265\'d0271.}
{\fs16 \par Walter, C. B. (1998). An alternative view of dynamical systems concepts in motor control and learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  326\'d0333.}{\fs16 \par Walter, C. B., & Swinnen, S. P. (1992). Adaptive tuning of \u173 ?
interlimb attraction to facilitate bimanual coupling. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Motor Behavior, 24,}{\fs16  95\'d0104.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Walter, C. B., & Swinnen, S. P. (1994). The formulation and dissolution of \ldblquote bad habits\rdblquote  during the acquisition of coordination skills. In S. Swinnen, H. Heuer, J. Maisson, & \line }
{\fs16 P. Casaer (Eds.), }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Interlimb coordination: Neural, dynamical, and cognitive constraints}
{\fs16  (pp. 491\'d0513). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.\par }{\fs16 Wann, J. P., }{\fs16 & Nimmo-Smith, I. (1991). The control of pen pressure in handwriting: A subtle point. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 10,}{\fs16  223\'d0246.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Wannaprom, N., Treleaven, J., Jull, G., & Uthaikhup, S. (2018). Neck muscle vibration produces diverse responses in balance and gait speed between individuals with and without neck pain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Musculoskeletal Science and Practice, 35,}{\fs16  25}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 29.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16
Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances: Visual \u173 ?guidance of stair climbing. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Experimental \u173 ?
Psychology: \u173 ?Human Perception and Performance, 10,}{\fs16  683\'d0703.\par }{\fs16 Warren, W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of \u173 ?
walking through apertures: Body-scaled information for \u173 ?affordances. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13,}
{\fs16  371\'d0383.}{\fs16 \par Warren, W. H., Young, D. S., & Lee, D. N. (1986). Visual control of step length during running over irregular terrain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 12,}{\fs16  259\'d0266.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Waterman, A. H., Atkinson, A. L., Aslam, S. S., Holmes, J., Jaroslawska, A., & Allen, R. J. (2017). Do actions speak louder than words? Examining children\rquote s ability to follow instructions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Memory & Cognition, 45,}{\fs16  877\'d0890.}{\fs16 \par Watters, R. G. (1992). Retention of human sequenced behavior following forward chaining, backward chaining, and whole task training procedures. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 22,}{\fs16  117\'d0129.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Wayne, N. L., & Miller, G. A. (2018). Impact of gender, organized athletics, and video gaming on driving skills in novice drivers. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 PLoS }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 One,}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  13}{\fs16 (1)}
{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  e0190885. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0190885}{\fs16  \par Weeks, D. L., & Anderson, L. P. (2000). The interaction of \u173 ?
observational learning with overt practice: Effects on motor skill learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 104,}
{\fs16  259\'d0271.}{\fs16 \par Weeks, D. L., & Kordus, R. N. (1998). Relative frequency of knowledge of performance and motor skill learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  \line 224\'d0230.\par }{\fs16 Weeks, D. J., & Proctor, R. W. (1990). Salient-features coding in the translation between orthogonal stimulus and response dimensions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 119,}{\fs16  355\'d0366.\par Weeks, D. L., & Sherwood, D. E. (1994). A comparison of knowledge of results scheduling methods for promoting motor skill acquisition and retention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  136\'d0142.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Weeks, D. L., & Wallace, S. A. (1992). Premovement posture and focal movement velocity effects on postural responses accompanying rapid arm movement. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Movement \u173 ?Science, 11,}{\fs16  717\'d0734.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Weeks, D. L., Wallace, S. A., & Anderson, D. I. (2003). \u173 ?
Training with an upper-limb prosthetic simulator to \u173 ?enhance transfer of skill across limbs. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 84,}{\fs16  437\'d0443.}{\fs16 \par Weinberg, D. R., Guy, D. E., & Tupper, R. W. (1964). Variations of post-feedback interval in simple motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67,}{\fs16  98\'d099.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Weir, P. L., & Leavitt, J. L. (1990). The effects of model\rquote s }{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 skill level and model\rquote s knowledge of results on the acquisition of an aiming task. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Human Movement Science, 9,}{\fs16  369\'d0383.\par }{\fs16 Welford, A. T. (1952). The psychological refractory period and the timing of high-speed performance\'d1A review and a \u173 ?
theory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 British Journal of Psychology, 43,}{\fs16  2\'d019.\par Welford, A. T. (1967). Single channel operations in the brain. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Acta Psychologica, 27,}{\fs16  5\'d022.\par Wenderoth, N., Bock, O., & Krohn, R. (2002). Learning a new bimanual coordination pattern is influenced by existing \u173 ?
attractors. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Motor Control, 6,}{\fs16  166\'d0182.\par Wesensten, N. J., Killgore, W. D., & Balkin, T. J. (2005). \line Performance and alertness effects of caffeine, dextroamphetamine, and modanifil during sleep deprivation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Sleep Research, 14,}{\fs16  255\'d0266.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Wheaton, L. A., Nolte, G., Bohlhalter, S., Fridman, E., }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 & \line \u173 ?Hallett, M. (2005). Synchronization of parietal and premotor areas during preparation and execution of praxis hand movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Clinical Neurophysiology, 116,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  1382\'d01390.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0
White, D. K., Wagenaar, R. C., Ellis, T. D., }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 & Tickle-Degnen, L. }{\fs16 (2009). Changes in walking activity and endurance }
{\fs16 \line }{\fs16 following rehabilitation for people with Parkinson\rquote s disease. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 90}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 ,}{\fs16  }{\fs16 43\'d050.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 White, O. (2015). The brain adjusts grip forces differently according to gravity and inertia: A parabolic flight experiment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 9}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 (7). doi: 10.3389/fnint.2015.00007.\par }
{\fs16 White, O., Karniel, A., Papaxanthis, C., Barbiero, M., & Nisky, I. (2018). Switching in feedforward control of grip force during tool-mediated interaction with elastic force fields. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 12,}{\fs16  article 31. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2018.0003.}{\fs16 \par Whiting, H. T. A. (Ed.). (1984). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human movement actions: Bernstein reassessed.}{\fs16  Amsterdam: North-Holland.\par }{\fs16 Whiting, H. T. A., Gill, E. B., & Stephenson, J. M. (1970). \u173 ?
Critical time intervals for taking in-flight information in a ball-catching task. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Ergonomics, 13,}
{\fs16  265\'d0272.}{\fs16 \par Whiting, H. T. A., Savelsbergh, G. J. P., & Pijpers, J. R. (1995). Specificity of motor learning does not deny flexibility. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw1 Applied Psychology: An International Review, 44,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1  315\'d0332.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1
\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Wickelgren, I. (2003). Tapping the mind. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Science, 299,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1
 496\'d0499.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw1 \par }{\fs16 Wickens, C. D. (1980). The structure of processing resources. In R. Nickerson (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Attention and performance VII}{\fs16  (pp.\u8239 ?239\'d0257). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.}{\fs16
\par Wickens, C. D. (1992). }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Engineering psychology and human performance}{\fs16  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: HarperCollins.\par Wickens, C. D. (2008). Multiple resources and mental workload. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Factors, 50}{\fs16 (3), 449\'d0455.\par Wickstrom, R. L. (1958). Comparative study of methodologies for teaching gymnastics and tumbling stunts. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly, 29,}{\fs16  109\'d0115.\par Widmaier, E. P., Raff, H., & Strang, K. T. (2006). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Vander\rquote s \u173 ?human physiology: The mechanisms of body function}{\fs16  \line (10th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.\par }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 Wightman, D. C., & Lintern, G. (1985). Part-task training strategies for tracking and manual control. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Human Factors, 27,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0  267\'d0283.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 \par }{\fs16 Wilberg, R. B., & Salmela, J. (1973). Information load and \u173 ?
response consistency in sequential short-term memory. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 37,}{\fs16
 23\'d029.}{\fs16 \par Williams, A. M., & Davids, K. (1998). Visual search strategy, selective attention, and expertise in soccer. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research \u173 ?Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69,}{\fs16  127\'d0135.}{\fs16 \par Williams, A. M., Davids, K., Burwitz, L., & Williams, J. G. (1994). Visual search strategies in experienced and inexperienced soccer players. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 65,}{\fs16  127\'d0135.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Williams, A. M., & Hodges, N. J. (2005). Practice, instruction and skill acquisition in soccer: Challenging tradition. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Sports Sciences, 23,}{\fs16  637}{\fs16 \'d0650.\par Williams, A. M., Hodges, N. J., North, J. S., & Barton, G. (2006). Perceiving patterns of play in dynamic sport \line tasks: Investigating the essential information underlying skilled performance. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perception, 35}{\fs16 (3), 317\'d0332.\par Williams, A. M., Ward, P., Knowles, J. M., & Smeeton, N. J. (2002). Anticipation skill in a real-world task: Measurement, training, and transfer in tennis. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8,}{\fs16  259}{\fs16 \'d0270.\par Williams, A. M., Ward, P., Smeeton, N. J., & Allen, D. (2004). Developing anticipation skills in tennis using on-court instruction: Perception versus perception and action. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 16}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 ,}{\fs16  350\'d0360.\par Williams, J. G. (1988). Perception of a throwing action from point-light demonstrations. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 67,}{\fs16  273}{\fs16 \'d0274.\par }{\fs16 Williams, J. G., &. McCririe, N. (1988). Control of arm and fingers during ball catching. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 14,}{\fs16  241\'d0247.\par }{\fs16 Williams, L. R. T., & Walmsley, A. (2000). Response amendment in fencing: Differences between elite and novice \u173 ?
subjects. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 91,}{\fs16  131\'d0142.\par Willingham, D. B. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of \u173 ?
motor skill learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychological Review, 105,}{\fs16  \line 558}{\fs16 \'d0584.\par Wilson, M. R., Causer, J., & Vickers, J. N. (2015). Aiming for excellence: The quiet eye as a characteristic of expertise. In J. Baker & D. Farrow (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Routledge handbook of sport expertise}{\fs16  (pp. 22\'d037). London: Routledge.\par Wilson, P. N., Foreman, N., & Tlauka, M. (1997). Transfer of spatial information from a virtual to a real environment. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Factors, 39,}{\fs16  526\'d0531.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-1 Winstein, C. J., Pohl, P. S., Cardinale, C., Green, A., Scholtz, L., \line & }
{\fs16 Waters, C. S. (1996). Learning a partial-weight-\u173 ?bearing skill: Effectiveness of two forms of feedback. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Physical Therapy, 76,}{\fs16  985}{\fs16 \'d0993.\par }{\fs16 Winstein, C. J., Wulf, S. L.}{\fs16 ,}{\fs16  & Schweighofer, N. (2015). Task-oriented training to promote upper extremity recovery. In J. Stein, R. L. Harvey, C. J. Winstein, R. D. Zorowitz, & G. F. Wittenberg (Eds.). }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Stroke recovery and re}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 h}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
abilitation}{\fs16  (2nd ed., pp. 320}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 343). New York, NY: Demos Medical Publications.}{\fs16 \par Winstein, C. J., & Schmidt, R. A. (1990). Reduced frequency of\u8239 ?
knowledge of results enhances motor skill learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and \u173 ?
Cognition, 16,}{\fs16  677\'d0691.\par Winter, J. A., Allen, T. J., & Proske, U. (2005). Muscle spindle signals combine with the sense of effort to indicate limb position. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Physiology}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 \'d1London, 568,}{\fs16  1035\'d01046.\par Winther, K. T., }
{\fs16 & Thomas, J. R. (1981). Developmental \u173 ?differences in children\rquote s labeling of movement. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of\u8239 ?Motor Behavior, 13,}{\fs16  77\'d090.\par Witherington, D. C., Campos, J. J., Anderson, D. I., Lejeune, L., & Seah, E. (2005). Avoidance of heights on the visual cliff in newly walking infants. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Infancy, 7}{\fs16 (3), 285\'d0298.\par }{\fs16 Wittwer, J. E., Webster, K. E., & Hill, K. (2012). Rhythmic auditory cueing to improve walking in patients with neuro}
{\fs16\u173 ?}{\fs16 logical conditions other than Parkinson\rquote s disease\'d1what is the evidence? }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Disability and Rehabilitation}{\fs16 .}{\fs16  doi: 10.3109/09638288.2012.690495}{\fs16 .}{\fs16  \par }{\fs16 Wolfe, J. M. (2014). Approaches to visual search: Feature integration theory and guided search. In A. C. Nobre & \line S. Kastner (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 The Oxford handbook of attention}{\fs16  \line (pp. 11\'d055). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.}
{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Wolpert, D. M., & Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational \u173 ?principles of movement neuroscience. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Nature Neuroscience, 3}{\fs16 (Supplement), 1212\'d01217.}{\fs16 \par Wood, C. A., Gallagher, J. D., Martino, P. V., & Ross, M. (1992). Alternate forms of knowledge of results: \u173 ?\u173 ?
Interaction of augmented feedback modality on learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 22,}
{\fs16  213\'d0230.}{\fs16 \par Wood, C. A., & Ging, C. A. (1991). The role of interference and task similarity on the acquisition, retention, and transfer of simple motor skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 62,}{\fs16  18\'d026.}{\fs16 \par Wood, J. M., & Abernethy, B. (1997). An assessment of the \u173 ?
efficacy of sports vision training programs. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Optometry and\u8239 ?Vision Science, 74,}{\fs16
 646}{\fs16 \'d0659.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Woodworth, R. S. (1899). The accuracy of voluntary movement. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
Psychological Review Monographs, 3 }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 (Whole No.\u8239 ?302).}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
Wright, C. E. (1990). Generalized motor programs: Reexamining claims of effector independence in writing. In M. \u173 ?Jeannerod (Ed.)}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 ,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Attention and }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
p}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 erformance XII: Motor }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 r}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2
epresentation and }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 c}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 ontrol}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  (pp. 294\'d0320). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \par }{\fs16 Wright, D. L., & Shea, C. H. (1991). Contextual dependencies in motor skills. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Memory & Cognition, 19,}{\fs16  361}{\fs16 \'d0390.\par Wright, D. L., & Shea, C. H. (1994). Cognition and motor \u173 ?acquisition: Contextual dependencies. In C. R. Reynolds (Ed.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Cognitive assessment: A multidisciplinary perspective}{\fs16  (pp. 89\'d0106). New York, NY: Plenum.\par }
\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Wright, D. L., Snowden, S., & Willoughby, D. (1990). \u173 ?Summary KR: How much information is used from the summary? }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Journal of Human Movement Studies, 19,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  119\'d0128.\par }{\fs16 Wrisberg, C. A., & Liu, Z. (1991). The effect of contextual \u173 ?
variety on the practice, retention, and transfer of an applied motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 62,}
{\fs16  406\'d0412.\par Wrisberg, C. A., & Pein, R. L. (1992). The preshot interval and free-throw shooting accuracy: An exploratory investigation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 The Sport Psychologist, 6,}{\fs16  14\'d023.\par }{\fs16 Wu, C., Trombly, C. A., Lin, K., & Tickle-Degnen, L. (1998). Effects of object affordances on reaching performance in persons with and without cerebrovascular accident. }
{\fs16 \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 52,}{\fs16  447\'d0456.}{\fs16 \par Wu, G., Haugh, L., Sarnow, M., & Hitt, J. (2006). A neural network approach to motor-sensory relations during postural disturbance, }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Brain Research Bulletin, 69,}{\fs16  365\'d0374.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Wulf, G. (2007). Attentional focus and motor learning: A review of 10 years of research. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Bewegung and Training, 1,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  4\'d014.\par }{\fs16 Wulf, G. (2013). Attentional focus and motor learning: A review of 15 years.}
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  International Review of Sport and \line Exercise Psychology, 6}{\fs16 (1), 77 \'d0104.\par Wulf, G., Chiviacowsky, S., Schiller, E., & }
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'e7}{\fs16 vila, L. T. G. (2010). Frequent external focus feedback enhances motor learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Frontiers in Psychology, 1,}{\fs16  1\'d07. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00190.\par }{\fs16 Wulf, G., Landers, M., Lewthwaite, R., & T}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9a}{\fs16 llner, T. (2009). External focus instructions reduce postural stability in individuals with Parkinson disease. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Physical Therapy, 89,}{\fs16  162\'d0168.}{\fs16 \par Wulf, G., Lauterbach, B., & Toole, T. (1999). The learning \u173 ?
advantages of an external focus of attention in golf. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}
{\fs16  120\'d0126.\par Wulf, G., }{\fs16 & Lee, T. D. (1993). Contextual interference in \u173 ?movements of the same class: Differential effects on \u173 ?
program and parameter learning. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor \u173 ?Behavior, 25,}{\fs16  254\'d0263.\par }
{\fs16 Wulf, G., & Lewthwaite, R. (2016). Optimizing performance through intrinsic motivation and attention for learning: The OPTIMAL theory of motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 23,}{\fs16  1382\u8722 ?1414.}{\fs16 \par Wulf, G., McNevin, N., }
{\fs16 & Shea, C. H. (2001). The automaticity of complex motor skill learning as a function of attentional focus. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A,}{\fs16  1143\'d01154.\par Wulf, G., }{\fs16 & Prinz, W. (2001). Directing attention to movement effects enhances learning: A review. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8,}{\fs16  648\'d0660.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Wulf, G., & Schmidt, R. A. (1996). Average KR degrades parameter learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 28,}{\fs16  371\'d0381.}{\fs16 \par Wulf, G., Shea, C., & Lewthwaite, R. (2010). Motor skill learning and performance: A review of influential factors. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Medical Education, 44,}{\fs16  75\'d084.\par Wulf, G., Shea, C. H., & Whitacre, C. A. (1998). Physical \u173 ?
guidance benefits in learning a complex motor skill. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 30,}{\fs16  367\'d0380.\par }
{\fs16 Wulf, G., & Su, J. (2007). An external focus of attention enhances golf shot accuracy in beginners and experts. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 78,}{\fs16  384\'d0389.}{\fs16 \par Wulf, G., & Toole, T. (1999). Physical assistance devices in complex motor skill learning: Benefits of a self-controlled practice schedule. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 70,}{\fs16  265\'d0272.}{\fs16 \par Wulf, G., & Weigelt, C. (1997). Instructions about physical principles in learning a complex skill: To tell or not to tell\u8239 ?
.\u8239 ?.\u8239 ?.\u8239 ?}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 68,}{\fs16  362}{\fs16 \'d0367.\par Wuyts, I. J., & Buekers, M. J. (1995). The effects of visual and auditory models on the learning of a rhythmical \line synchronization dance skill. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Research Quarterly for \line }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Exercise and Sport, 66,}{\fs16
 105\'d0115.\par }{\fs16 Xeroulis, G. J., Park, J., Moulton, C-A., Reznick, R. K., LeBlanc, V., & Dubrowski, A. (2007). Teaching suturing and knot-tying skills to medical students: A randomized controlled study comparing computer-based video instruction and (concurrent and summary) expert feedback. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Surgery}{\fs16 . doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2006.09.012.\par Xiang, M.-Q., Hou, X.-H., Liao, B.-G., Liao, J-W., Hu, M., The effect of neurofeedback training for sport performance in athletes: A meta-analysis, }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychology of Sport & Exercise}{\fs16  (2018), doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2018.02.004.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Yagura, H., Hatakenaka, M., & Miyai, I. (2006). Does therapeutic facilitation add to locomotor outcomes of body weight-supported treadmill training in nonambulatory patients with stroke? A randomized controlled trial. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 87,}{\fs16  529\'d0535.\par }{\fs16 Yantis, S. (2008). The neural basis of selective attention: Cortical sources and targets of attentional modulation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17,}{\fs16  86\'d090.}{\fs16 \par Yao, W. X., & Fischman, M. G. (1999). Kinematic characteristics of aiming movements as a function of temporal and spatial constraints. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Motor Control, 3,}{\fs16  424\'d0435.\par Yao, W. X., Fischman, M. G., & Wang, Y. T. (1994). Motor skill acquisition and retention as a function of average feedback, summary feedback, and performance variability. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 26,}{\fs16  273\'d0282.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Yerkes, R.M., & Dodson, J.D. (1908). The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit formation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  459\'d0482.\par }
{\fs16 You, S. H., Jang, S. J., Kim, Y. H., Hallett, M., Ahn, S. H., Kwon, Y. H., .\'ca.\'ca. Lee, M. Y. (2005). Virtual \u173 ?
reality-induced cortical reorganization and associated \u173 ?locomotor recovery in chronic stroke: An experimenter-blind randomized study. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Stroke, 36,}{\fs16  1166\'d01171.\par Young, D. E., & Schmidt, R. A. (1992). Augmented kinematic feedback for motor learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 24,}{\fs16  261\'d0273.\par }{\fs16 Yu, Y., Liu, Y., Jiang, J., Yin, E., Zhou, Z., & Hu, D. (2018). An asynchronous control paradigm based on sequential motor imagery and its application in wheelchair navigation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 26}{\fs16 (12), 2367}{\fs16
\'d0}{\fs16 2375.\par Zach, S., Dobersek, U., Filho, E., Inglis, V., & Tenenbaum, G. (2018). A meta-analysis of mental imagery effects on post-injury functional mobility, perceived pain, and self-efficacy. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 34,}{\fs16  79}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 87.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16 Zachry, T., Wulf, G., Mercer, J., & Bezodis, N. (2005). Increased movement accuracy and reduced EMG activity as the result of adopting an external focus of attention. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Brain Research Bulletin, 67,}{\fs16  304\'d0309.}{\fs16 \par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Zago, M., McIntyre, J., Senot, P., & Lacquanti, F. (2009). }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 \line Visuomotor}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  coordination and internal models for object interception. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2
Experimental Brain Research, 192}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 (4), 571\'d0604.\par }{\fs16 Zago, M., Pacifici, I., Lovecchio, N., Galli, M., Federolf, P. A., & Sforza, C. (2017). Multi-segmental movement patterns reflect juggling complexity and skill level. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Movement Science, 54,}{\fs16  144\'d0153.\par }{\fs16 Zanone, P.-G., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1992). Evolution of behavioral attractors with learning: Nonequilibrium phase transitions. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18,}{\fs16  403\'d0421.\par Zanone, P. -G., }
{\fs16 & Kelso, J. A. S. (1994). The coordination \u173 ?dynamics of learning: Theoretical structure and experimental agenda. In S. Swinnen, H. Heuer, J. Massion, & \line P. Casaer (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Interlimb coordination: Neural, dynamical, and cognitive constraints}{\fs16  (pp. 461\'d0490). San Diego, CA: \u173 ?
Academic Press.\par Zanone, P.-G., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1997). The coordination dynamics of learning and transfer: Collective and component levels. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Experimental Psychology}{\fs16 : }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Human Perception and Performance, 23,}
{\fs16  1454\'d01480.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 Zatorre, R. J., Fields, R. D., & Johansen-Berg, H. (2012). Plasticity in gray and white: Neuroimaging changes in brain structure during learning. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Nature Neuroscience, 15, }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2 528\'d0536.\par }{\fs16 Zehetleitner, M., Hegenloh, M., & M}
{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'9f}{\fs16 ller, H. J. (2011). Visually guided pointing movements are driven by the salience map. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
Journal of Vision, 11}{\fs16 (1), 24}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1  }{\fs16 doi: 10.1167/11.1.24. \par }{\fs16 Zehr, E. P., & Duysens, J. (2004). Regulation of arm and leg movement during human locomotion. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Neuroscientist, 10,}{\fs16  347\'d0361.}{\fs16 \par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa28\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Zelaznik, H. N., & Franz, E. (1990). Stimulus-response compatibility and the programming of motor activity: Pitfalls and possible new directions. In R. Proctor & T. G. Reeve (Eds.), }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Stimulus-response compatibility: An integrated \u173 ?perspective}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  (pp. 279}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 \'d0295). Amsterdam: North-Holland.\par }{\fs16 Zelaznik, H. N., Hawkins, B., & Kisselburgh, L. (1983). Rapid visual feedback processing in single-aiming movements. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of Motor Behavior, 15,}{\fs16  217}{\fs16 \'d0236.\par Zelaznik, H. N., Spencer, R. M., & Doffin, J. G. (2000). \u173 ?
Temporal precision in tapping and circle drawing movements at preferred rates is not correlated: Further evidence against timing as a general-purpose ability. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 Journal of \u173 ?Motor \u173 ?Behavior, 32,}{\fs16  193}{\fs16 \'d0199.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2
Zelinsky, G. J., Rao, R. P. N., Hayhoe, M. M., & Ballard, D. H. (1997). Eye movements reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of visual search. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw2 Psychological Science, 8,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw2  448\'d0453.\par }{\fs16 Zentgraf, K., Stark, R., Reiser, M., Kunzell, S., Schienle, A., Kirsch, P., .\'ca.\'ca. Munzert, J. (2005). Differential activation of pre-SMA and SMA proper during \u173 ?
action observation: Effects of instruction. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 NeuroImage, 26}{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw0 ,}
{\fs16  662\'d0672.\par }{\fs16 Zetou, E., Tzetzis, G., Vernadakis, N., & Kioumourtzoglou, E. (2002). Modeling in learning two volleyball skills. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 94,}{\fs16  1131\'d01142.\par }{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 Zhang, W.}
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2 ,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  & Rosenbaum, D. A. (2008). Planning for manual positioning: The end-state comfort effect for manual abduction-adduction. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-2 Experimental Brain Research, 184,}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2  383\'d0389.}{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw-2
\par }{\fs16 Zhong, P., & Stone, R. T. (2013). Automated kinesthetic trainer enhances kinesthetic memory development. }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 32,}{\fs16  238}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 245.\par Ziskind-Conhaim, L., & Hochman, S. (2017). Diversity of molecularly defined spinal interneurons engaged in mammalian locomotor pattern generation. }
{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Journal of Neurophysiology, 118,}{\fs16  2956}{\fs16 \'d0}{\fs16 2974.\par }\pard\plain \s2\f1\fs16\ltrpar\ql\fi-240\li240\ri0\sb0\sa0\facenter\sl200\slmult0\expnd0\expndtw0\cf0\up0\charscalex100\b0\i0\ul0\strike0\accnone\hyphpar1\lang1033
{\fs16 Zubiaur, M., O}{\*\cs4\f3\fs16\b0\i0 \'96}{\fs16 a, A., }{\fs16 & Delgado, J. (1999). Learning volleyball serves: A preliminary study of the effects of knowledge }
{\fs16\expnd0\expndtw0 of performance and results, }{\*\cs3\fs16\b0\i\expnd0\expndtw-1 Perceptual and Motor Skills, 89,}{\fs16  223\'d0232.\par }
{\*\cs6\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul0\cf0\outl0 \par }}